Title: Simulating Robotic Locomotion in Sand: Resistive Force Theory in an Open-Source Physics Engine

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.19504v1

Published Time: Fri, 19 Jun 2026 00:11:06 GMT

Number of Pages: 12

Markdown Content:
> 1

# Simulating Robotic Locomotion in Sand: Resistive Force Theory in an Open-Source Physics Engine 

Ryan W. Brown, Laura K. Treers, Kathryn A. Daltorio, Member, IEEE 

Abstract —Recent advancements in Resistive Force Theory (RFT) enable approximation of ground reaction forces for loco-motion in sand without the computational expense of modeling interactions with individual grains. However, these tools have been absent in 3D physics engines commonly used for robot simulation. We explore if resistive force approximations are sufficient, when integrated with standard dynamics calculations, to provide a stable substrate for a freely walking robot. To de-termine this, we implement 3D Granular Resistive Force Theory (3D RFT) in a physics simulation engine, MuJoCo. We verify simulations in multiple scenarios to demonstrate that key trends due to end effector shape, speed, and loading are preserved. Our implementation predicts walking distance and foot sinkage of a 12-Degree of Freedom hexapod robot within 20% of experiments in sand. While RFT has inherent approximations, the open source tool described here has potential to help develop new and improved robot designs to traverse granular media substrates. 

Index Terms —Contact Modeling, Legged Robots, Biologically-Inspired Robots, Granular Media Model 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

The unique behavior of granular media is so universal that “sandbox” has become shorthand for “a controlled virtual environment for creative development” [1]–[3] – and yet no widely-available robotics simulation software models sand. In man-made environments, factory robots are optimized using simulated digital twins to streamline supply chains [4], [5], cars drive more reliably with simulation-developed collision prevention [6] or gridlock prevention [7], and legged robots are learning in simulation to open doors [8] and climb stairs [9]. In outdoor environments, sinking into sand affects step size, grain size affects cost of transport, and dirt refilling holes after a step affects foot placement. Excluding these common effects from simulation limits the complexity and robustness of behaviors that are possible for outdoor robots. By moving from linear stiffness models to depth-dependent resistive forces in an open-source simulator, we hope to provide a “sandbox” for robots that traverse new paths in natural environments. Currently, the most developed robots for granular terrains are either heavy duty, heavily sensorized, or tested in special-ized physical environments. For example, heavy construction vehicles [10], agricultural tractors [11], and all-terrain tanks [12] are scaled such that the sinkage into the substrate is 

This work was supported by the Office of Naval Research under the grant ONR N00014-24-1-2022 Corresponding Author Ryan W. Brown: ryanbrown@case.edu, and Kathryn A. Daltorio: kati@case.edu Ryan W. Brown and Kathryn A. Daltorio are with the College of Engineer-ing, Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering at Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH 44106 Laura K. Treers is with the College of Engineering and Mathematical Sci-ences, Department of Mechanical Engineering at the University of Vermont, Burlington, VT 05405 

Fig. 1. Walking of legged robots in granular media is modeled using MuJoCo. As a physical robot walks through sand (top), the legs and feet penetrate the ground at different angles throughout the gait cycle, especially when taking advantage of crab-like pointed end effectors (dactyls). To simulate (bottom), we use open-source MuJoCo for overall dynamics and add Resistive Force Theory (RFT) sites (light gray dots) across leg surfaces. As a result, the simulated stance dactyls (yellow tripod) sink into the ground until resistive forces support weight and inertial forces. The sinkage affects performance, in particular determining the step size of swing dactyls (blue tripod). 

relatively small. NASA and other space agencies have identi-fied mars-like deserts for testing [13] and constructed testbeds for rovers [14]. With many sensors, smart bipeds [15] and quadrupeds [16] have demonstrated walking in sand based on closed-loop reactions [17]. However, smaller, simpler robots [18]–[26] may not have access to the same level of sensory feedback or precisely calibrated test beds — yet still sink considerably into sand such that sand-robot interaction forces cannot be neglected. Often these designs are inspired by animals that dig [27], swim [28], and undulate [29] in sandy environments. To iteratively improve these robot behaviors, roboticists make in situ modifications to end-effectors, gait parameters, or payloads [30]. However, in situ modifications are not always possible or convenient. To capture the interaction forces when robot limbs or wheels sink into soft ground (Figure 1), some robot designers apply terramechanics principles to estimate nonlinear ground reaction forces. The most accurate approach, Discrete Element Method [31], or DEM, computes motions of each individual grain, but the high computational cost is a limitation. Because many iterative design algorithms [32], learning methods [33], and model predictive control strategies [34] often depend on simulations that run faster than real time, reduced-order 

> arXiv:2606.19504v1 [cs.RO] 17 Jun 2026 2

Fig. 2. Resistive Force Theory, RFT, is a fundamentally different approach for predicting ground contact forces, which estimates intrusion forces on rigid bodies passing through sandy ground. (Left) MuJoCo’s fast default handling of many contacts can be attributed to key simplifications of Coulomb friction. (A) First, the geometry is simplified and contact points where rigid convex hulls intersect are identified. (B) Rather than directly calculate the force required to prevent intersection, normal forces are approximated such that they increase with each timestep as constraints are violated. (C) These normal forces and proportional friction forces are applied at the contact point. (D) The default approach does not allow legs to pass through ground. If an intruder rotates around a point with fixed height, the normal forces (which MuJoCo shows as three red arrows) increase indefinitely to prevent penetration. (Right) Our RFT implementation integrates with MuJoCo by (A) discretizing geometry into plate elements and placing sites on each plate surface centroid, (B) determining intrusion force vectors based on plate orientation, intrusion angle, depth z, and area A, and (C) applying resistive forces at each plate center. As as a result (D), the RFT-affected intruder intrudes deep into the sand, exiting on the other side. 

empirical [35] and continuum approaches [36] are attractive. Resistive Force Theory (RFT) [35] is efficient and simple to use for estimating granular intrusion forces. RFT was origi-nally developed for low Reynolds number fluids and was later extended to grains [37]. Unlike typical friction-cone contact models [38] in which maximum tangential forces scale with normal forces, RFT forces in all directions are proportional to penetration depth, z, and surface area, A (Figure 2). Scaling factors are determined based on the direction of motion γ and the angle of the surface β [39]. Impressively, a single constant (the resistive coefficient, ζ) can be used to calibrate different soils across a wide range of grain sizes and densities. Fur-thermore, RFT assumes that forces on individual discretized elements are independent, and thus are summed to estimate whole-body intrusion forces. The simplicity of this method enables RFT to provide rapid intrusion force predictions with reasonable accuracy, despite not directly modeling individual grains within the substrate. 3

Ongoing research has evaluated and expanded the accuracy of RFT for application to a range of locomotion behaviors, from rigid wheels [40], [41], running hexapods [39], and undulation [42]. RFT has also recently been expanded from the vertical [39] and horizontal [43] planes to 3D [44], [45] via the introduction of an additional characteristic angle, ψ. Several implementations of 3D-RFT have been developed in recent years using these new kinematic parameters; namely, Treers et al. [44], and Huang et al. [46] developed 3D implementations which combined elements of existing 2D formulations and Agarwal et al. [45] developed a 3D implementation using a mechanistic framework. For higher speeds, implementation of an inertial term is used in Dynamic RFT (D-RFT), but inertial effects were limited (speed <12.6 cm/s) in our simulations and thus we did not implement an inertial correction [46]. The implementation of Treers et al.’s formulation proved to be compatible with the MuJoCo framework because it was developed open-source as a standalone function that can determine forces on any meshed input geometry. RFT has known limitations, such as the inability to model granular jamming and shadowing [47], and the need for additional adjustments for cohesive soils [48]. However, RFT remains the most rapid method for estimating forces in granu-lar media. The force approximations are surprisingly effective, even for burrowing in terrain. For example, optimizing the relative leg orientation to maximize downward force enabled a mole crab-inspired robot to dig into sand until its entire body was submerged [18]. However, solving the inverse problem (predicting motions from estimated forces) is more compli-cated due to the sensitivity of RFT at low velocity. RFT relies on a velocity vector from which to compute intrusion angle and thus intrusion forces; furthermore, when velocity magnitude approaches zero, the velocity direction used for RFT computation is ill-defined. Previous RFT implementations have predicted the motion of robots with continuously rotating legs [39]. In limited 2D scenarios such as for mini-RHex with MBDyn [39] and for multi-link fins with Pynamics [42], motion was predicted, but none of the 3D extensions of RFT were used. Whether RFT is appropriate for predicting motion of multi-jointed legs, where joint velocities can result in a stationary stance foot, is untested. Here, we hypothesize that relatively sim-ple smoothing will enable RFT to extend to articulated leg movement where ankle and knee joints minimize end effector velocity during stance. To our knowledge, 3D RFT has never been implemented in a simple open-source dynamic solver. In particular, in the vertical direction, a dynamic solver should integrate forces from a substrate and gravity to determine sink-age, which affects traction, efficiency, and chassis clearance. Here, we investigate the extent to which a 3D RFT model, integrated into a multi-body simulator, approximates robot locomotion speed and ground reaction forces on sandy terrain. We select MuJoCo as the open-source dynamic solver to augment because it is widely used [49], [50], and MuJoCo provides a faster and more capable environment than others such as Bullet, PhysX, and ODE [49]. We call the resulting implementation RFT-SiM (Resistive Force Theory — Sand in MuJoCo) and compare prediction with physical experiments in a simple sandbox (Figure 1). For increasingly complex scenarios leading up to a freely walking 12 DOF robot, we show that varying leg speed, foot shape, and payload in the model correctly predicts changes in robot motion. By predicting motion, rather than forces, our open-source approach, RFT-SiM, will enable roboticists to apply end-to-end learning algorithms and broader iterative mechanical design. Furthermore, demonstrating the ease of integration will encourage refinements and calibrations of terramechan-ics models to help robots navigate new areas - undersea, extraterrestrial, agriculture, and construction. Granular media simulations are also key tools to understand animals who thrive on different terrains, which helps us appreciate and mimic the creativity of the natural world. II. M ETHODS 

We select a crab-like robot platform as an example model of animal-inspired locomotion in granular media. Legs of biological crabs tend to penetrate deeply into the substrate to provide stability without adding weight [51]. Crabs migrate across diverse granular media and serve as inspiration for the growing interest in legged all-terrain platforms. In addition, unlike other robots evaluated in sand [18], [39], crab-like walking involves low velocity and stall of legs due to their pointed feet and varied gaits, both of which cause high sinkage (Figure 1) [52]. These conditions cannot be modeled with existing simulation tools; thus, we develop RFT-SiM as the first open-source framework appropriate for articulated walking when feet sink into sand. 

A. RFT Implementation 

RFT-SiM replaces MuJoCo’s built-in ground contact force calculation with RFT force calculations. This replacement required a few key changes to the standard MuJoCo physics (Figure 2A-C). First, each body is represented as a mesh of “plates” to correctly capture the orientations of each surface and allow for RFT superposition of forces. We find that a mesh density of 0.03 plates/mm 2, as shown in Figure 2, provides adequate resolution for debugging and visualization. Points (MuJoCo sites) are placed at the centroid of each mesh plate to serve as force application locations. Second, the orientation of the plates and their velocity vectors are used to calculate a set of force vectors based on the 3D RFT formulation described by Treers et al. [44]. At low speeds ( <20 cm/s), RFT forces are independent of intrusion velocity magnitude and depend only on surface orientation, surface area, depth, and velocity direction. The interaction forces from RFT scale linearly with depth and cross-sectional area of a plate. Each plate of a mesh has its own local basis ( e1j , e2j , and e3j ), and the world frame is represented by E1, E2, and E3 (Figure 2B). e1j represents the intersection of the plate with the horizontal plane E1-E2 while 

e2j represents the horizontal projection of the plate’s normal vector. 4

The 3D force, Fj , from granular media is defined for a plate element j as 

Fj = ζ(F1 + F2 + F3) (1) 

F1 = −f1(ψ, γ ) αY sign  v · e1j

 z A e1j (2) 

F2 = −f23 (ψ, γ ) αX (γ, β, M ) z A e2j (3) 

F3 = f23 (ψ, γ ) αZ (γ, β, M ) z A E3 (4) where αX , αY , and αZ are resistive coefficients that rep-resent stresses per unit depth, ψ is the angle of e2 relative to the horizontal velocity projection, γ is the intrusion angle, 

v is the velocity, z is the depth of the plate, and A is the area of the plate [44]. M represents a matrix used for fitting from Li et al [39]. αX and αZ are empirically derived by Li et al. and are functions of characteristic angles γ and 

β. f1, f23 , and αY are derived by Treers et al. [44]. f1

and f23 are scaling factors that are empirically characterized via horizontal plate drag experiments. Of the models for 

αY , we choose the simpler implementation which assumes 

αY = αx(γ = 0 ◦, β = 0 ◦, M ). We utilize the RFT coefficient, 

ζ, to represent effective intrusion resistance from sand. We also employ the leading edge hypothesis [53] and remove forces on elements not pushing on the granular media, i.e. for which the normal dotted with the velocity is negative (Equation 5). 

vj · nj < 0 = ⇒ Fj = 0 (5) Using this formulation, along with the geometry of an in-truding body, the overall reaction force from granular media is found by summing force contributions over all elements 

(Ftotal = P Fj ).The matrix of generated forces then passes through single exponential moving average smoothing with an αF (smoothing factor) of 0.1, chosen to produce continuous motion at low ve-locities. Exponential moving averages have been used widely across fields [54]–[56], in addition to being used for control and predictive vision in robots [57], [58]. RFT relies on the existence of a velocity vector from which to calculate forces [59]. When a body is static (velocity magnitude approaches zero), there is a discontinuity in the forces predicted by RFT. With minimal smoothing, a small force inhibits the velocity vector magnitude from reducing to zero. After the first timestep, the overall sorted force matrix (sorted form of Equation 1 to match site and face index order) is smoothed to remove large spikes caused by sudden movements by the intruding body (Equation 6). 

Fsn =



αF Fsn + (1 − αF )Fsn−1 , ∃Fsn−1

FO , ∄Fsn−1

(6) where αF is the smoothing parameter, Fsn is the smoothed and sorted force matrix at timestep n, Fsn−1 is the previous smoothed and sorted force matrix and FO is the initial sorted force matrix. αF was chosen qualitatively to be 0.1 by observing the behavior at low velocities. For rotating intruder simulations, we used Proportional-Integral (PI) control for the integrated velocity motor from MuJoCo, with minor smoothing to achieve reliable motion (Equation 7 and Equation 8). 

CR = C + CP I + d (7) 

Csn = αC R + (1 − α)Csn−1 (8) 

CR is the control signal from a predefined array of joint angles, 

C is the velocity control value, CP I is the PI compensation, d

is a damping term, Cs is the smoothed control signal, and α is the smoothing parameter. The PI gains were determined using trial and error. α was set to 0.1 to minimally smooth the resul-tant control signal. Here, we use single exponential smoothing, similar to that in Equation 6. The smoothing allows the system to retain a small force that inhibits the velocity magnitude from reducing to zero. This prevents the system from experiencing unrealistic behaviors at low velocities, where force directions are not well defined. As expected, without smoothing, end effectors oscillate vertically and horizontally with increasing amplitude. With too much smoothing, the intruders sink too deeply before resistance is encountered. With a smoothing factor of 0.1, the velocities decay exponentially to less than 

0.1 cm/s when the robot leg is in stance for 1.5 s. To determine surface orientation, surface area, depth, and velocity direction in RFT-SiM, an RFT force calculation func-tion takes built-in MuJoCo variables (mjData state variables) as variable arguments. Then, the function decomposes the velocity and normal vectors in the same fashion as described in Li et al. [39], seen in Figure 2. The MuJoCo API (applica-tion programming interface) state variable used for recording velocity between time-steps is the COM velocity for all bodies dependent on one another. For each body independent of one another, we instead use MuJoCo position state variables with kinematic equations to find the velocity of an intruder. When the program detects that part of a body is below the sand, it passes the necessary variables to the 3D RFT function. After the forces are calculated, the faces, sites, and forces are sorted by index to ensure proper placement of applied forces on the accompanying faces. To apply individualized forces, we index the 3-D force array and use mj.applyFT from the MuJoCo API. Using mj.applyFT , we apply forces at specific sites defined by the MuJoCo .XML. MuJoCo then uses the built-in physics solver to update multi-body dynamics and predict the motion of the system. Since there are many more force application points when using RFT-SiM, the total run time compared with the default MuJoCo contact model is an order of magnitude slower. 

B. Simulation Setup 

The simulation initialization creates the bodies needed for RFT calculation, defines the necessary joints and sensor IDs to reference, and places sites on meshes in the descriptor. It is important to have even, dense meshing of the intruder in the force application region (as seen in Figure 2) to ensure smooth force application across the body and limit inaccuracy caused by large plate sizes [44]. The model contains an equal number of force application sites to plates so that the program attributes a force to each discrete face [60]. 5

Discretizing a body’s faces into plates (meshing) is done before the simulation to prepare it to be read by O PEN 3D, a library for 3D data processing [61]. To produce a mesh with a specified face count and a uniform distribution of faces, we import a CAD file into Fusion360. In Fusion360, we use the reduce and remesh tools to modify the mesh density. Using OPEN 3D in RFT-SiM, the vertices and faces of the mesh are recorded. After collecting a dictionary of model bodies, the simulation has completed initialization and proceeds to the iterative simulation loop. We tested multiple intruder geometries, an articulated robotic scoop-like end effector, and a full 12-DOF hexapod robot in sand. A descriptor .XML file for each of the testing environments was defined to closely match each corresponding physical testing environment. For visualization, we color the force application sites according to their representative stresses (Figure 2). 

C. Hardware and Software Programs 

We utilized a custom built PC with an AMD Ryzen 7 9800X3D, 32 GB DDR4 RAM, and an NVIDIA GeForce RTX 5060 with Windows 11 for the simulations throughout this work. All simulations were conducted using the Python programming language. The open-source physics application Tracker was used to collect data from videos captured of experimental trials. III. R ESULTS 

We established three baseline tests to verify the simulation method. The first baseline test measured torque increase as a result of rotating an object through sand. This verified that our RFT model correctly predicted changes in force and torque on an intruder as depth varied. The second baseline test measured the distance traveled by a carriage that was propelled along a rail by a rotating intruder. This test verified our model’s ability to predict motion of a multi-DOF system. Third, we tested an articulated leg following a 3D path through sand to pull the carriage along the rail. This test validated that the model was capable of correctly integrating force predictions for 3D geometries and trajectories. Finally, we tested the full freely walking robot, without height constraints, to demonstrate that RFT-SiM can predict the motion of an unconstrained multi-DOF system. All physical validation tests were conducted in a sandbox (15-23 cm deep) filled with Quikrete Play Sand. We vertically inserted a horizontal plate into the sand and measured the intrusion resistance of the substrate. From this, we estimate an RFT coefficient ζ=3.75 [N/cm 3] to represent the force per unit depth per unit area, based on calibration tests outlined by Li et al. [39]. A variety of RFT coefficients were tested in simulation to ensure model robustness over the many possible granular media packing states that a robot could encounter. Coefficients of ζ = 0.1, 0.5, and 1 represent substrates that are loosely packed, while coefficients of ζ = 2 and above represent more common natural substrates such as beach sand. The expected RFT coefficient for the sand used in this study was determined to be 3.75 through the method described by Li et al. [39]. The engine timestep was chosen such that each simulation would produce stable results (approximately 0.0010 seconds for the rail-based simulations and 0.0008 seconds per iteration for the full robot). 

A. Torques on Fixed-base Rotating Intruder       

> Fig. 3. When rotating an irregular object at constant angular velocity, RFT simulation correctly predicts increases in required actuation torque when the object is in sand. (A) We verified the RFT implementation by rotating an irregular object 180 ◦about a fixed point such that the object enters and exits a flat bed of sand. (B) During rotation, we measured the torque required for the Dynamixel actuator to maintain a constant velocity (shaded regions represent ±one standard deviation about the mean over 5 trials). MuJoCo does not capture differences in actuator inertial resistance at different speeds, so simulated torques (dashed lines) are aligned with experimental steady torques after exiting sand, in addition to temporal alignment. Thus, differences in the shape and height of the peaks represent differences between experimental sand and the RFT sand model. Despite the extreme irregularity of the object, measured increased torques due to sand are within 32% of RFT predictions when normalized to zero, even with varying rotational speeds.

The first baseline comparison between RFT-SiM and exper-imental is a 20 mm wide rectangular intruder (Figure 3A) that passes through a granular substrate by rotating about a fixed point (Figure 3). Without RFT, MuJoCo cannot model passing through a granular substrate with existing rigid contacts: the forces increase indefinitely but the leg never passes through the substrate, which is modeled as a rigid body. When lowering solver impedance in MuJoCo, the solver has less power to enforce constraints, but still attempts to prevent the body from penetrating the surface (see Figure 7). With RFT-SiM, the intruder is able to swing through the sand while the forces along the leg increase linearly with depth (see colors in Figure 2D). The experimental torque was calculated from output current via the INA260 current sensor and then scaled to Dynamixel’s specifications ( KT = 0 .0240 ). The Dynamixel and intruder were suspended above the sand and attached to a carriage on a guide rail (Figure 2). For all rotating intruder tests, each experimental trial was run 5 times and position and current data was collected. The tested speeds were 0.5 radians per second, 1 radian per second, and 2 radians per second. These speeds were chosen to comply with the motor’s speed limit of six radians per second and to stay within speed assumptions for simulation, These tests were done at three speeds to confirm that resistive forces are independent of intrusion speed. The motor dynamics for the Dynamixel MX-64 used in the rotating intruder experimental setup were ignored and we 6  

> Fig. 4. When simple legs of different shape are rotated through the sand, RFT predicts motion along a fixed-height rail, with total displacements agreeing within 15%. (A) Carriage displacement vs. intruder rotation in both simulation and experiment is shown. Experimental data represents the mean and standard deviation over 5 trials. When the leg is a flat rectangular intruder, the carriage begins to move as the intruder enters the sand and stops moving when the intruder exits, in both simulation and experimental trials. (B) When rotating a leg with an open C-shape through sand, the experimental carriage moves much less than the flat intruder leg, while the simulated carriage moves only slightly less. (C) When the C-shaped leg rotation direction is reversed (resulting in a closed C-shape), the carriage displaces more than for a flat rectangular intruder, and the simulation captures only some of this difference. Simulated forces on leading surfaces of each leg are shown in insets in (A-C). Circle insets show portions of rotation in which each leg engages sand. (D) When trials are compared across different speeds, the affects of the leg shape are present in both experimental and simulated trials, but the differences in performance are smaller in simulation.

assumed that the motor was capable of maintaining a constant velocity when commanded, to simplify the RFT force testing. For motor control of the rotating intruder system, we employed an integrated velocity motor as defined in MuJoCo for velocity control similar to that available for the Dynamixel MX-64. We measured the friction using an unloaded carriage slipping on a declined rail experimentally and then varied the coefficient of friction qualitatively to achieve similar starting and stopping of the carriage. The carriage was bisected laterally to provide hor-izontal planar contacts with the rail instead of using MuJoCo’s convex hull. The convex hull assumes a convex approximation of a mesh body. If used, this would approximate the carriage as a box, leaving no inlet for the rail to pass as intended, and inhibiting motion along the rail. The intruder was discretized into plates that were evenly distributed across the body surface (Figure 2) with a site and plate count of 5237 that ensured even, dense meshing with constant plate size. With an irregular object attached to the rotating element, the simulation correctly predicts increases in torque required to maintain a constant velocity throughout the intrusion trajectory (Figure 3). As the object rotates, the depth in sand increases, accompanying an increase in servomotor torque. Subsequently, the object rotates upwards, which decreases depth, and thus torque. The physical motor has a no-load torque which in-creases with rotational speed; thus, an offset is added to the simulation predictions to align to experimental torques when there is no external load (Figure 3). No internal dynamics are part of the MuJoCo actuator; therefore, adding this constant offset to the prediction is needed to calibrate the model to the experiment. In subsequent trials, we measure motion rather than force, and thus this calibration is not required. Across the different speeds tested, RFT-SiM predicts the same peak torque increase (+0.055 Nm). This is consistent with the common RFT simplification at the heart of our imple-mentation: that forces are independent of velocity magnitude. At the fastest rotation, the maximum speed at the intruder tip is 12.6 cm/sec, which does not exceed 20 cm/s, a threshold above which inertial effects of the media become non-negligible [62]. Nonetheless, at the fastest speed of 2 rad/sec (19 rpm), the magnitude of the torque increase matches experimental data within a standard deviation. At slower speeds, experimental torque at the peak is 18% less than predicted on average. 

B. Constrained Progress due to Rotating Intruder 

Subsequent trials were conducted with the carriage allowed to freely translate along the rail. The translating trials used 7

a flat rectangular intruder, an open c-shape, and a closed c-shape that were 3D printed with PLA filament (Figure 4). These shapes were chosen to parallel RFT tests in Li et al. and Zhang et al. [35], [39]. Each intruder was placed such that the max intrusion depth was 5.5 centimeters, while attached to the rail 9 centimeters above the sand. The physical data for rotating intruders was collected by turning the intruder 180 ◦

at a constant speed. The carriage displacement after an intruder rotation was consistently within 6% of the experimental value for the flat rectangular intruder (Figure 4A). We observed a delay in the experimental carriage motion for each geometry (Figure 4A-C) likely due to friction in the rail. The total rail carriage displacement was highest for the closed c-shape. The closed c-shape had a convex geometry which was in contact with the substrate for the longest duration. The open c-shape resulted in less progress (-53%) than the flat rectangular intruder in experimental data, and to a lesser extent in simulation (-25%). The effects of depth and angle are visualized in the inset of Figure 4A-C. Our results show that the shape affects the experimental total progress more than the rotational speed. Doubling and quadrupling the speed did not affect the experimental progress per cycle more than a standard deviation, which is expected given the velocity independence of the intrusion forces. The small variations in final displacement due to speed can likely be attributed to inertial effects of the rigid bodies. For the rect-angular intruder and closed c-shape, the simulation predicted even smaller changes in displacement with speed than the open c-shape. For the open c-shape, the simulation predicted a larger increase in displacement with speed than the flat rectangular intruder. The overall error roughly doubled between simulation and experiment for the fastest rotation speed relative to the lowest speed. However, flipping the shape of the leg from open to closed more than doubled the overall progress in experiment. These effects were more muted in simulation; however, the trend was consistent at all three speeds: the open shape resulted in less progress than a flat rectangular intruder which, in turn, progressed less than a closed shape. 

C. Constrained Progress due to Single Articulated Leg    

> Fig. 5. The simulated articulated leg pulls the supporting carriage along the guide rail by using an end effector stepping into and out of sand. (A) Time evolution of the guide rail carriage in simulation and experimental trials are shown. (B) Final carriage displacement after three steps of the articulated leg are shown at different simulated ζ.

The third baseline test compared the carriage motion when propelled by a 3DOF leg that swept through sand (Figure 5). The articulated leg used the same carriage as the rotating intruder. The leg was attached to the carriage and allowed to pull itself by plunging into sand. The 3DOF leg used three servo motors to trace a 3D path in and out of the sand. The motion of the end effector was comparable to an abducting step with a 3DOF hexapod leg. The sand in these tests was placed 1 cm below the rail so the end effector would bury itself in the sand. The carriage used for rotating intruder tests was used for the articulated leg tests. Both the articulated leg and full robot systems employ position-based controllers to model the chosen Savox servos and thus do not need smoothing. Plate count was set to 5237 for articulated leg simulations. The articulated leg simulation predicted the displacement change over one step within 8% of the experimental value (Figure 5A). The simulated guide rail carriage position change (0.126 m) was less during each step than the experimental results (0.138 m), similar to patterns in Section III-B, possibly due to the inertial effects, rail contact simplifications, or motor dynamics. 

D. Speed and Sinkage of Walking Hexapod Robot 

To demonstrate prediction of motions for a 3D multi-body system, we evaluated the walking speed and penetration depth of the dactyls (sinkage) for a 4.04 kg 12DOF hexapod robot (Figure 6A) freely walking in a 15 in deep sandbox (Supple-mentary Movie 1) [63]. The robot had knee and ankle joints on each of the six legs. The robot’s end effectors are shown in Figure 6A. We ran 20 individual physical trials of 5 cycles (a cycle is a step by the robot) per trial (1 cycle per second), and 24 simulated trials of the same behavior (computation time of 2.1 minutes per trial on a desktop computer). We also varied payload by adding barbell weights weighing 1 kg and 2.277 kg. The videos were taken by a camera placed above the sandbox at a distance such that that the camera distortion from the center to the edge of the sandbox was negligible. In experiment, the user placed the robot in the sand, whereas in simulation, the robot was dropped from 10 cm to allow the legs to move to initial position that matched experimental trials without lasting effects on the simulation. The robot could have been materialized in sand, but sinkage assumptions would have to have been made to determine initial depth. For the full robot simulation, the resolution of each introducing body was set to 500 sites and plates to increase simulation efficiency compared to previous scenarios. The same gait and motor commands were used on both the physical system and the simulation. As shown in Figure 6B, we compared the walking distance over time in both the experiment and simulation. Overall, RFT-SiM (with ζ = 3.75) tended to underestimate the walking distance per step between 9.6% and 34%. The estimated 5 step position error over three payloads was between 16% and 22%. There was visible rocking and slight backwards motion in each walking cycle of the simulated robot, which was not present in the physical trials. In the example shown in Figure 6B, the backwards motion is 23% of the forward motion - enough to explain the underestimation. In the physical trials, sand tends to pile up behind the legs (referred to as clumping [64]) which 8         

> Fig. 6. We used our implementation to predict the motion of a walking hexapod robot. (A) The legs and dactyl surfaces are discretized into plate elements, each with RFT “sites” (gray dots), with the deepest points generating the most force (graded in red). (B) Translation of the robot without payload is tracked over six steps. (C) Mean sinkage vs. resistive coefficient for three different payloads is shown. The dactyl tips sink more when payload is added. For each payload condition, experimental sinkages are averaged over each trial, and compared with simulation results across a range of RFT coefficients, ζ. Based on initial sand characterization, we expected experimental ζto be 3.75, while the experimental sinkage aligns more closely with higher resistive coefficients, with ζranging from 5.67-5.88. Robot speed (D) and sinkage (E) in RFT are compared with experiments across three payloads. Error bars represent one standard deviation. Experimental data in (D) is averaged over 5 trials ±one standard deviation while (E) is measured after a single trial.

may steady the robot in transitions between alternating tripods of the walking gait. RFT-SiM does not capture this behavior because the substrate is assumed to be perpetually flat. An algorithm to estimate changes in penetration depth due to local surface deformation might mitigate rocking in simulation [41]. As expected, in both the simulation and experimental data, the dactyls sink deeply into the sand, and this sinkage increases when additional payload weight is added to the robot (Figure 6E). However, the simulation overestimates the sinkage depth (mean sinkage is 20% higher), which could be responsible for the lower speed in simulation (Figure 6D-E), although rocking remains the main contributor. To determine if tuning a single simulation parameter could be used to more closely fit the experimental speed and sinkage, we varied the RFT coefficient, ζ. Although the calibrated experimental ζ is 3.75 [39], increasing ζ in simulation is a stable way of decreasing sinkage depth. Specifically, at 

ζ ≈ 5.8, the sinkage of the simulated robot matched with experimental results for each payload (Figure 6C). The in-congruence between calibrated ζ and fitted ζ may be due to the smoothing at low velocities underestimating dissipative forces in sand, compounding approximations of robot mass and payloads, or unexpected compaction in the experimental sandbox. Although increasing ζ reduces sinkage, speed is not necessarily improved (Figure 7A-B), likely due to increased tangential resistance. We also observe that the robot success-fully walks when ζ is as low as 0.5, representing soft sand. When ζ is below 0.5, the robot fails to overcome slip due to to high sinkage and cannot move forward. ζ can be tuned depending on which quantities (speed, sinkage) are prioritized for accuracy. Increasing the payload affects the locomotion speed in non-linear ways for both our simulation framework and for physical experiments. Too much weight causes the robot to sink more deeply into the sand such that speed decreases. However, too little weight limits robot traction, and also decreases speed. Thus, both our framework and physical experiments tend to have intermediate optimal weights for traction (and thus speed) when the simulation has ζ=3.75. This trend was not preserved at ζ=5, suggesting that the simulation at ζ=3.75 captures important trends in experimental behavior. 

E. Comparison with other Contact Models 

Other readily available contact models can be fitted to exper-imental results, but do not capture the local maxima in walking speed due to varying payload that calibrated RFT captures. To visualize this, we compared additional simulation data at finer payload resolution (Figure 7C-E). Models chosen for comparison were: 1. MuJoCo soft constraints (low impedance in the solver), 2. Low Friction (rigid ground with noticeable 9           

> Fig. 7. RFT ( ζ= 3.75) captures the local maxima in walking speed better than existing options in MuJoCo. We plot average walking speed vs. payload for five different simulation conditions, and compare experimental and simulation results. Errors represent one standard deviation. (A) We simulated additional payload increments (gray bars) with ζ= 3.75 to show refinement of trend in previous figure (colored bars). The colors are kept consistent to compare fastest experimental speed (green bar) with slower experimental speeds (orange and blue bars). No other method preserves this trend. (B) Increasing RFT coefficient ζ
> to 5.0 to better captures sinkage but does not better capture speed. (C) Soft MuJoCo constraints were obtained by modifying default impedance ( d) parameters.
> d0was set to 0.01 instead of 0.9, dwidth = 0.5 instead of 0.95, and width = 0.08 instead of 0.001. (D) A low friction model is implemented with a friction coefficient of 0.008. Simulation results closely matched the expected velocity from experiments. (E) The fully rigid condition has a friction coefficient of 0.4. Each of the alternative simulation methods are labeled and contained within Movie 1.

slip μ = 0.008), and 3. Fully rigid (rigid ground with μ =0.4). The models were chosen because they have easily tunable properties associated with ground contacts in MuJoCo. Each model was tuned to exhibit smooth motion over 5 cycles. MuJoCo’s soft constraint model (Figure 7C) provides vi-sually similar motions to experimental data. Tuning the soft constraint model involved changing the solver impedance for ground contacts, which corresponds to the simulated ground’s ability to generate force. At low impedance, the end effectors penetrate the ground. However, because the constraint forces due to penetrating the ground are inaccurate, the model over-estimates the speed. Furthermore, without accurate tangential resistance, all payload effects are erased as the speed decreases monotonically. We used the built-in solver adjustments solimp and solref to modify contact dynamics for the soft constraint model. Solimp 

adjusts the solver’s impedance, or the ability of contacts to generate an opposing force [65]. By default, solimp is defined by 5 numbers that represent the impedance function d(r)

where r is the constraint violation. We adjusted the first three parameters – initial impedance d0, impedance at width dw,and width w – from (0 .9, 0.95 , 0.001) to (0 .01 , 0.5, 0.08) 

to weaken contact constraints for the Soft Constraints model (Figure 7C). These weakened constraints allowed bodies to deeply intrude during contacts. To capture visually smooth motion during the Low Friction simulation (Figure 7D), we modified solref from (0 .02 , 1) to (0 .02 , 2) , doubling the effective damping of body contacts. Friction models inherently do not permit penetration, so high friction models (Figure 7E) do not capture backward slipping motion and thus overestimate speed in sand, although the payload does affect speed. Lowering the friction to μ

= 0.008, as in the Low Friction case (Figure 7D), reduced the overall speeds to best match experimental data within 1.2 mm/s (1.85 %) without payload, although the local maxima fell at different payloads than in experiment. A fully rigid model is provided for comparison, but it did not match experimental speeds. For this model, the default impedance was used to represent a baseline walking simula-tion. While contact forces are expected to linearly increase with payload, these contact forces can also oppose motion during the gait cycle depending on where on the curved dactyl contacts the ground [66]. Thus, there are two local maxima in rigid model (Figure 7E). Increasing the payload in these models affected the robot’s walking speed either irregularly (rigid, high RFT coefficient), with a slight decrease (low friction), or decreasing monoton-ically (soft constraints). This is in contrast with RFT-SiM, where an optimum speed occurs at an intermediate payload, matching experimental data. IV. D ISCUSSION 

Together, these experiments show that RFT-SiM is suffi-ciently general to model different types of leg penetration in sandy environments. The accuracy is consistent with previous RFT implementations, within a framework (MuJoCo) that models multi-jointed robot and animal motion. As first approx-imations, the results across the tested systems show agreement consistently within 34%, capturing measurable trends in leg speed (Figure 3), foot shape (Figure 4), step progress (Fig-ure 5), sinkage (Figure 6), and payload (Figure 7). Simulations and physical trial examples can be seen in Supplementary Video 1. Compared with lab sandbox testing, RFT-SiM is fast, consistent, and economical, making it an attractive option for design iteration and early validation before indoor and outdoor testing of robots. We expect RFT-SiM to be useful in increasingly complex scenarios, with some caveats. Starting and stopping motion has been tested and successfully modeled by using a smoothing algorithm for sand forces. Furthermore, 3D unconstrained motion is predicted by the hexapod robot model within 22.1% of the experimental results. However, some motion, such as large falls into sand, can cause unpredictable behavior such as bouncing off the substrate. Behaviors with high intrusion speeds or large downward forces may benefit from different smoothing approaches or refinements to the RFT model. The models are sensitive to calibration and may need some adjustments to body weights and motor strength to avoid fast (>20 cm/s) movements. 10 

Techniques could be developed to improve the fit between the simulation and experimental data. Some of the inaccuracies of our model stem from the lack of an accurate virtual repre-sentation of the experimental robot. The servomotors used in the robot do not provide position or torque feedback that could be used to inform model motor parameters. Additionally, their inertia and internal friction have not been modeled [67], [68]. More feedback from the experimental robot would inform more accurate modeling of the simulated system using built-in MuJoCo properties. In future work, RFT-SiM could also rapidly adapt to different sand properties; for example, ζ

could be updated based on real-time terrain characterization feedback. Newer RFT refinements have also been developed, including inertial corrections [46], [53], modifications for muddy or nonlinear soils [69]–[71], and adjustments for cohesive substrates [48]. Either calibrated sand beds (such as a fluidized bed) [72] or comparison with calibrated DEM models [73], [74] would be needed to refine the model without additional features. Our hope is that this approach will be valuable to others who are preparing robots for challenging outdoor and remote terrains, since running physics simulations for whole robot missions was previously computationally impossible in rea-sonable time frames [31], [70], [75]. RFT-SiM is able to determine 12-DOF robot dynamics over 5 step cycles (one cycle per second) in about 2 minutes on a consumer-grade CPU. While this is still not as fast as real time and the code has potential for additional acceleration in future work, we have run RFT-SiM on an off-the-shelf 2019 laptop in 5 minutes for 5 cycles of a walking robot, suggesting potential for live field work simulations. Thus, researchers will be able to iterate quicker on robot hardware, controllers, and smart behaviors in a simulation “sandbox”. RFT-SiM makes RFT-informed mechanical design (such as what has been done for low DOF robots [76]) available for higher DOF robot bipeds, quadrupeds, and hexapods to learn to traverse and manipulate granular media. Users can visualize locations of maximum resistive force during a gait cycle, and vary a single parameter, 

ζ, to represent different non-cohesive substrates. Because the framework captures key trends in performance, future ML algorithms commonly used in MuJoCo [77]–[79] could be used to systematically search the design parameter space to evolve robust new low-cost platforms for space exploration, desert operation, beach cleanup, and off-road mobility. The code is currently available at https://github.com/ Crab-Lab-CWRU/RFT-SiM. V. A CKNOWLEDGMENTS 

Thank you to Dr. John Grezmak, Clayton Jackson, Joshua Towns, Zachary Moskowitz, Sophia Bricker, Dr. Austin Mills, Dr. Jianfeng Zhou, Jiyuan Jiang, and the CrabLab. 

Funding: RWB and KAD were supported by the Office of Naval Research under the grant ONR N00014-24-1-2022. LKT was supported by NSF ERI 2501934. 

Author contributions: RWB prepared the original draft. RWB, KAD, and LKT conceived the main ideas and edited the manuscript. RWB developed the simulation method and per-formed experimental testing. LKT provided guidance on 3D RFT implementation and its integration with the simulation. KAD provided advisory guidance and analyzed data. 

Competing interests: RWB, LKT, and KAD have no competing interests to declare. REFERENCES [1] A. Devanga, V. K. Ramesh, and R. Bockmon, “Creating a Mixed Reality (Physical) Sandbox,” in 2025 11th International Conference on Virtual Reality (ICVR) , pp. 322–329, July 2025. [2] W.-G. Ringe and C. Ruof, “Regulating Fintech in the EU: the Case for a Guided Sandbox,” European Journal of Risk Regulation , vol. 11, pp. 604–629, Sept. 2020. [3] T. Bl¨ asing, L. Batyuk, A.-D. Schmidt, S. A. Camtepe, and S. Albayrak, “An Android Application Sandbox system for suspicious software detec-tion,” in 2010 5th International Conference on Malicious and Unwanted Software , pp. 55–62, Oct. 2010. [4] A. B´ ecue, E. Maia, L. Feeken, P. Borchers, and I. Prac ¸a, “A New Concept of Digital Twin Supporting Optimization and Resilience of Factories of the Future,” Applied Sciences , vol. 10, p. 4482, Jan. 2020. [5] L. Zhang, L. Zhou, L. Ren, and Y. Laili, “Modeling and simulation in intelligent manufacturing,” Computers in Industry , vol. 112, p. 103123, Nov. 2019. [6] D. Karunakaran, S. Worrall, and E. Nebot, “Efficient statistical validation with edge cases to evaluate Highly Automated Vehicles,” in 2020 IEEE 23rd International Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITSC) , pp. 1–8, Sept. 2020. [7] V. L. Sivakumar, P. S. Perumal, and A. Raju, “Design and Implementa-tion of a Suburban Signal Traffic Control and Management System in the Field of Informatics,” in 2023 7th International Conference on I-SMAC (IoT in Social, Mobile, Analytics and Cloud) (I-SMAC) , pp. 1047–1054, Oct. 2023. [8] P. Arm, M. Mittal, H. Kolvenbach, and M. Hutter, “Pedipulate: En-abling Manipulation Skills using a Quadruped Robot’s Leg,” in 2024 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) ,pp. 5717–5723, May 2024. [9] S. Qi, W. Lin, Z. Hong, H. Chen, and W. Zhang, “Perceptive Au-tonomous Stair Climbing for Quadrupedal Robots,” in 2021 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) ,pp. 2313–2320, Sept. 2021. [10] G. Scora, K. Boriboonsomsin, T. D. Durbin, K. Johnson, S. Yoon, J. Collins, and Z. Dai, “Variability in Real-World Activity Patterns of Heavy-Duty Vehicles by Vocation,” Transportation Research Record ,vol. 2673, pp. 51–61, Sept. 2019. [11] G. Molari, L. Bellentani, A. Guarnieri, M. Walker, and E. Sedoni, “Per-formance of an agricultural tractor fitted with rubber tracks,” Biosystems Engineering , vol. 111, pp. 57–63, Jan. 2012. [12] J. Kim, J. Yoon, and J.-D. Lee, “Dominant design and evolution of technological trajectories: The case of tank technology, 1915–1998,” 

Journal of Evolutionary Economics , vol. 31, pp. 661–676, Apr. 2021. [13] A. Azua-Bustos, C. Gonz´ alez-Silva, and A. G. Fair´ en, “The Atacama Desert in Northern Chile as an Analog Model of Mars,” Frontiers in Astronomy and Space Sciences , vol. 8, Jan. 2022. [14] E. T. Rezich and A. Schepelmann, “NASA Glenn Research Center mTRAX Planetary Exploration Laboratories Capabilities Overview,” vol. 2595, p. 8024, June 2021. ADS Bibcode: 2021LPICo2595.8024R. [15] J. R. Gosyne, C. M. Hubicki, X. Xiong, A. D. Ames, and D. I. Goldman, “Bipedial Locomotion Up Sandy Slopes: Systematic Experiments Using Zero Moment Point Methods,” in 2018 IEEE-RAS 18th International Conference on Humanoid Robots (Humanoids) , pp. 994–1001, Nov. 2018. [16] H. Kolvenbach, P. Arm, E. Hampp, A. Dietsche, V. Bickel, B. Sun, C. Meyer, and M. Hutter, “Traversing Steep and Granular Martian Analog Slopes with a Dynamic Quadrupedal Robot,” Field Robotics ,vol. 2, pp. 910–939, May 2022. [17] H. Zheng, D. Wang, D. Z. Chen, M. Wang, and R. P. Behringer, “Intruder friction effects on granular impact dynamics,” Physical Review E, vol. 98, p. 032904, Sept. 2018. [18] L. K. Treers, B. McInroe, R. J. Full, and H. S. Stuart, “Mole crab-inspired vertical self-burrowing,” Frontiers in Robotics and AI , vol. 9, Oct. 2022. [19] N. D. Naclerio, A. Karsai, M. Murray-Cooper, Y. Ozkan-Aydin, E. Ay-din, D. I. Goldman, and E. W. Hawkes, “Controlling subterranean forces enables a fast, steerable, burrowing soft robot,” Science Robotics , vol. 6, p. eabe2922, June 2021. 11 

[20] M. Isava and A. G. Winter V, “An Experimental Investigation of Digging Via Localized Fluidization, Tested With RoboClam: A Robot Inspired by Atlantic Razor Clams,” Journal of Mechanical Design , vol. 138, Sept. 2016. [21] Y. Gong, M. Pan, and K. A. Daltorio, “Using a Small Hexapod Robot to Pick up Large Cylinders for Munitions Response,” Journal of Field Robotics , vol. 42, no. 5, pp. 1679–1695, 2025. eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/rob.22482. [22] H. Bagheri, D. Stockwell, B. Bethke, N. K. Okwae, D. Aukes, J. Tao, and H. Marvi, “A bio-inspired helically driven self-burrowing robot,” 

Acta Geotechnica , vol. 19, pp. 1435–1448, Mar. 2024. [23] J. J. Tao, S. Huang, and Y. Tang, “SBOR: a minimalistic soft self-burrowing-out robot inspired by razor clams,” Bioinspiration & Biomimetics , vol. 15, p. 055003, July 2020. [24] R. A. Russell, “CRABOT: A Biomimetic Burrowing Robot Designed for Underground Chemical Source Location,” 

Advanced Robotics , vol. 25, pp. 119–134, Jan. 2011. eprint: https://doi.org/10.1163/016918610X538516. [25] M. Barenboim and A. Degani, “Steerable Burrowing Robot: Design, Modeling and Experiments,” in 2020 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pp. 829–835, May 2020. [26] T. Zhang, H. Wei, H. Zheng, Z. Liang, H. Yang, Y. Zhang, H. Zhu, Y. Guan, X. Ding, K. Wang, and K. Xu, “Mole-Inspired Robot Burrowing with Forelimbs for Planetary Soil Exploration,” Advanced Intelligent Systems , vol. 6, no. 6, p. 2300392, 2024. eprint: https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/aisy.202300392. [27] Z. Faulkes and D. H. Paul, “Coordination between the legs and tail during digging and swimming in sand crabs,” Journal of Comparative Physiology A , vol. 180, pp. 161–169, Jan. 1997. [28] R. Maladen, Y. Ding, P. Umbanhowar, A. Kamor, and D. Goldman, 

Biophysically inspired development of a sand-swimming robot . June 2010. [29] B. P. Filardo, D. S. Zimmerman, and M. I. Weaker, “Vehicle with traveling wave thrust module apparatuses, methods and systems,” Oct. 2023. [30] N. Graf, J. Grezmak, N. Carmichael, Y. Gong, and K. Daltorio, “Ad-dressing Foot Geometry Trade-Offs to Achieve Amphibious Surf Zone Transitions with a Crab Robot,” in Walking Robots into Real World 

(K. Berns, M. O. Tokhi, A. Roennau, M. F. Silva, and R. Dillmann, eds.), (Cham), pp. 95–106, Springer Nature Switzerland, 2024. [31] M. Dosta, D. Andre, V. Angelidakis, R. A. Caulk, M. A. Celigueta, B. Chareyre, J. F. Dietiker, J. Girardot, N. Govender, C. Hubert, R. Kobyłka, A. F. Moura, V. Skorych, D. K. Weatherley, and T. Wein-hart, “Comparing open-source DEM frameworks for simulations of common bulk processes,” Computer Physics Communications , vol. 296, p. 109066, Mar. 2024. [32] C. S. Tan, R. Mohd-Mokhtar, and M. R. Arshad, “A Comprehensive Review of Coverage Path Planning in Robotics Using Classical and Heuristic Algorithms,” IEEE Access , vol. 9, pp. 119310–119342, 2021. [33] A. I. K´ aroly, P. Galambos, J. Kuti, and I. J. Rudas, “Deep Learning in Robotics: Survey on Model Structures and Training Strategies,” 

IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics: Systems , vol. 51, pp. 266–279, Jan. 2021. [34] T. Salzmann, E. Kaufmann, J. Arrizabalaga, M. Pavone, D. Scaramuzza, and M. Ryll, “Real-Time Neural MPC: Deep Learning Model Predictive Control for Quadrotors and Agile Robotic Platforms,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , vol. 8, pp. 2397–2404, Apr. 2023. [35] T. Zhang and D. I. Goldman, “The effectiveness of resistive force theory in granular locomotiona),” Physics of Fluids , vol. 26, p. 101308, Oct. 2014. [36] S. Dunatunga and K. Kamrin, “Continuum modelling and simulation of granular flows through their many phases,” Journal of Fluid Mechanics ,vol. 779, pp. 483–513, Sept. 2015. arXiv:1411.5447 [cond-mat]. [37] J. Gray and G. J. Hancock, “The Propulsion of Sea-Urchin Sperma-tozoa,” Journal of Experimental Biology , vol. 32, pp. 802–814, Dec. 1955. [38] I. Kao, K. M. Lynch, and J. W. Burdick, “Contact Modeling and Manipulation,” in Springer Handbook of Robotics (B. Siciliano and O. Khatib, eds.), pp. 931–954, Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2016. [39] C. Li, T. Zhang, and D. I. Goldman, “A Terradynamics of Legged Locomotion on Granular Media,” Science , vol. 339, pp. 1408–1412, Mar. 2013. [40] S. Agarwal, C. Senatore, T. Zhang, M. Kingsbury, K. Iagnemma, D. I. Goldman, and K. Kamrin, “Modeling of the interaction of rigid wheels with dry granular media,” Journal of Terramechanics , vol. 85, pp. 1–14, Oct. 2019. [41] Q. Yu, C. Pavlov, W. Kim, and A. M. Johnson, “Modeling wheeled locomotion in granular media using 3D-RFT and sand deformation,” 

Journal of Terramechanics , vol. 115, p. 100987, Oct. 2024. [42] D. Li, S. Huang, Y. Tang, H. Marvi, J. Tao, and D. M. Aukes, “Compliant Fins for Locomotion in Granular Media,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , vol. 6, pp. 5984–5991, July 2021. [43] R. D. Maladen, Y. Ding, C. Li, and D. I. Goldman, “Undulatory Swimming in Sand: Subsurface Locomotion of the Sandfish Lizard,” 

Science , vol. 325, pp. 314–318, July 2009. [44] L. K. Treers, C. Cao, and H. S. Stuart, “Granular Resistive Force Theory Implementation for Three-Dimensional Trajectories,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , vol. 6, pp. 1887–1894, Apr. 2021. [45] S. Agarwal, D. I. Goldman, and K. Kamrin, “Mechanistic framework for reduced-order models in soft materials: Application to three-dimensional granular intrusion,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences ,vol. 120, p. e2214017120, Jan. 2023. [46] L. Huang, J. Zhu, Y. Yuan, and Y. Yin, “A Dynamic Resistive Force Model for Designing Mobile Robot in Granular Media,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , vol. 7, pp. 5357–5364, Apr. 2022. [47] C.-H. Ko and M. Elimelech, “The “Shadow Effect” in Colloid Transport and Deposition Dynamics in Granular Porous Media: Measurements and Mechanisms,” Environmental Science & Technology , vol. 34, pp. 3681– 3689, Sept. 2000. [48] D. Kerimoglu, E. Marteau, D. Soto, and D. I. Goldman, “Extending granular resistive force theory to cohesive powder-scale media,” Journal of Terramechanics , vol. 120, p. 101058, Oct. 2025. [49] T. Erez, Y. Tassa, and E. Todorov, “Simulation tools for model-based robotics: Comparison of Bullet, Havok, MuJoCo, ODE and PhysX,” in 2015 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pp. 4397–4404, May 2015. [50] D. Blanco-Mulero, O. Barbany, G. Alcan, A. Colom´ e, C. Torras, and V. Kyrki, “Benchmarking the Sim-to-Real Gap in Cloth Manipulation,” 

IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , vol. 9, pp. 2981–2988, Mar. 2024. [51] N. M. Graf, A. M. Behr, and K. A. Daltorio, “Crab-Like Hexapod Feet for Amphibious Walking in Sand and Waves,” in Biomimetic and Biohybrid Systems (U. Martinez-Hernandez, V. Vouloutsi, A. Mura, M. Mangan, M. Asada, T. J. Prescott, and P. F. Verschure, eds.), (Cham), pp. 158–170, Springer International Publishing, 2019. [52] J. Grezmak, N. Graf, A. Behr, and K. Daltorio, “Terrain Classification Based on Sensed Leg Compliance for Amphibious Crab Robot,” IEEE Sensors Journal , vol. 21, pp. 23308–23316, Oct. 2021. [53] H. Askari and K. Kamrin, “Intrusion rheology in grains and other flowable materials,” Nature Materials , vol. 15, pp. 1274–1279, Dec. 2016. [54] A. C. Smit, E. Schat, and E. Ceulemans, “The Exponentially Weighted Moving Average Procedure for Detecting Changes in Intensive Lon-gitudinal Data in Psychological Research in Real-Time: A Tutorial Showcasing Potential Applications,” Assessment , vol. 30, pp. 1354– 1368, July 2023. [55] J.-z. Wang, N.-p. Ju, Y.-b. Tie, Y.-j. Bai, and H. Ge, “A framework for identifying the onset of landslide acceleration based on the expo-nential moving average (EMA),” Journal of Mountain Science , vol. 20, pp. 1639–1649, June 2023. [56] O. Grigg and D. Spiegelhalter, “A Simple Risk-Adjusted Exponen-tially Weighted Moving Average,” Journal of the American Sta-tistical Association , vol. 102, pp. 140–152, Mar. 2007. eprint: https://doi.org/10.1198/016214506000001121. [57] F. Gu´ erin, S. G. Fabri, and M. K. Bugeja, “Double Exponential Smooth-ing for predictive vision based target tracking of a wheeled mobile robot,” in 52nd IEEE Conference on Decision and Control , pp. 3535– 3540, Dec. 2013. [58] Y. Ting, T. V. Nguyen, and J.-C. Chen, “Design and performance evaluation of an exponentially weighted moving average–based adaptive control for piezo-driven motion platform,” Advances in Mechanical Engineering , vol. 10, p. 1687814018767194, June 2018. [59] T. M. Huh, C. Cao, J. Aderibigbe, D. Moon, and H. S. Stuart, “Walk-Burrow-Tug: Legged Anchoring Analysis Using RFT-Based Granu-lar Limit Surfaces,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , vol. 8, pp. 3796–3803, June 2023. [60] E. Angelidis, J. Bender, J. Arreguit, L. Gleim, W. Wang, C. Axenie, A. Knoll, and A. Ijspeert, “Gazebo Fluids: SPH-based simulation of fluid interaction with articulated rigid body dynamics,” in 2022 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) ,pp. 11238–11245, Oct. 2022. [61] Q.-Y. Zhou, J. Park, and V. Koltun, “Open3D: A Modern Library for 3D Data Processing,” Jan. 2018. arXiv:1801.09847 [cs]. 12 

[62] S. Agarwal, A. Karsai, D. I. Goldman, and K. Kamrin, “Surprising simplicity in the modeling of dynamic granular intrusion,” Jan. 2021. arXiv:2005.10976 [cond-mat]. [63] J. Grezmak and K. A. Daltorio, “Probing with Each Step: How a Walking Crab-like Robot Classifies Buried Cylinders in Sand with Hall-Effect Sensors,” Sensors , vol. 24, p. 1579, Jan. 2024. [64] L. P. Kadanoff, “Built upon sand: Theoretical ideas inspired by granular flows,” Reviews of Modern Physics , vol. 71, pp. 435–444, Jan. 1999. [65] E. Todorov, T. Erez, and Y. Tassa, “MuJoCo: A physics engine for model-based control,” in 2012 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems , pp. 5026–5033, Oct. 2012. [66] N. M. Graf, J. E. Grezmak, and K. A. Daltorio, “Get a grip: inward dactyl motions improve efficiency of sideways-walking gait for an amphibious crab-like robot,” Bioinspiration & Biomimetics , vol. 17, p. 066008, Oct. 2022. [67] B. Perez Inturias, J. P. G. Marques de Oliveira, and M. Becerra Var-gas, “Virtual Model of a Robotic Arm Digital Twin with MuJoCo,” in Robotics, Computer Vision and Intelligent Systems (J. Filipe and J. R¨ oning, eds.), (Cham), pp. 457–469, Springer Nature Switzerland, 2024. [68] K. Zakka, B. Tabanpour, Q. Liao, M. Haiderbhai, S. Holt, J. Y. Luo, A. Allshire, E. Frey, K. Sreenath, L. A. Kahrs, C. Sferrazza, Y. Tassa, and P. Abbeel, “MuJoCo Playground,” Feb. 2025. arXiv:2502.08844 [cs]. [69] K. Kamrin, K. M. Hill, D. I. Goldman, and J. E. Andrade, “Advances in Modeling Dense Granular Media,” Annual Review of Fluid Mechanics ,vol. 56, pp. 215–240, Jan. 2024. [70] Q. Zhang, E. Deal, J. T. Perron, J. G. Venditti, S. J. Bena-vides, M. Rushlow, and K. Kamrin, “Fluid-Driven Transport of Round Sediment Particles: From Discrete Simulations to Con-tinuum Modeling,” Journal of Geophysical Research: Earth Sur-face , vol. 127, no. 7, p. e2021JF006504, 2022. eprint: https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1029/2021JF006504. [71] A. S. Baumgarten and K. Kamrin, “A general fluid–sediment mixture model and constitutive theory validated in many flow regimes,” Journal of Fluid Mechanics , vol. 861, pp. 721–764, Feb. 2019. [72] N. Menon and D. J. Durian, “Particle Motions in a Gas-Fluidized Bed of Sand,” Physical Review Letters , vol. 79, pp. 3407–3410, Nov. 1997. [73] C. J. Coetzee and D. N. J. Els, “Calibration of granular material param-eters for DEM modelling and numerical verification by blade–granular material interaction,” Journal of Terramechanics , vol. 46, pp. 15–26, Feb. 2009. [74] Y. Hu and Y. Lu, “A novel framework for calibrating DEM parameters: A case study of sand and soil-rock mixture,” Computers and Geotechnics ,vol. 174, p. 106619, Oct. 2024. [75] N. Govender, D. N. Wilke, and S. Kok, “Blaze-DEMGPU: Modular high performance DEM framework for the GPU architecture,” SoftwareX ,vol. 5, pp. 62–66, Jan. 2016. [76] T. Zhang, Z. Liang, H. Zheng, Z. Chen, K. Zheng, R. Xu, J. Liu, H. Zhu, Y. Guan, K. Xu, and X. Ding, “Mole-inspired Forepaw Design and Optimization Based on Resistive Force Theory,” Journal of Bionic Engineering , vol. 22, pp. 171–180, Jan. 2025. [77] J. He, B. Chong, Z. Xu, S. Ha, and D. I. Goldman, “Learning to enhance multi-legged robot on rugged landscapes,” Sept. 2024. arXiv:2409.09473 [cs]. [78] Z. Xu, Y. Li, X. Yang, Z. Zhao, L. Zhuang, and J. Zhao, “Open-Source Reinforcement Learning Environments Implemented in MuJoCo with Franka Manipulator,” in 2024 IEEE International Conference on Advanced Intelligent Mechatronics (AIM) , pp. 709–714, July 2024. [79] C. Fietkiewicz, L. Tran, R. McDougal, C. Jackson, R. D. Quinn, H. J. Chiel, and P. J. Thomas, “Neuromechanical Simulation with NEURON and MuJoCo,” June 2025. Pages: 2025.06.17.660217 Section: New Results.