Title: KYON: Semi-Modular Wheel-Legged Quadruped With Agile Bimanual Capability

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.30243v1

Published Time: Tue, 30 Jun 2026 02:14:49 GMT

Number of Pages: 8

Markdown Content:
# KYON: Semi-Modular Wheel–Legged Quadruped With Agile Bi-Manual Capability 

Luca Rossini 1, Arturo Laurenzi 1, Francesco Ruscelli 1, Yifang Zhang 1, Giovanbattista Gravina 1,Lorenzo Baccelliere 1, Corrado Burchielli 1, Stefano Cordasco 2 and Nikos Tsagarakis 1

Abstract — This paper presents KYON, a hybrid wheel–legged quadruped robot equipped with a bi-manual upper body for loco-manipulation tasks. The platform features a semi-modular design with reconfigurable lower legs, enabling both wheeled and legged locomotion depending on the environment. A design approach that places actuators in the base and uses transmis-sion mechanisms reduces distal inertia, improving agility and dynamic performance. The robot integrates a whole-body con-trol framework together with a reinforcement learning-based policy to handle nonlinear dynamics and enhance robustness to disturbances for the execution of locomotion and manipu-lation tasks, independently. Experimental results demonstrate effective dynamic locomotion and bi-manual manipulation, validating the platform’s capability to operate in complex and unstructured scenarios. 

I. INTRODUCTION Legged robots have the potential to make a significant impact in industrial, domestic, and natural environments, all of which are inherently designed by and for humans. Although their under-actuation introduces several challenges, humanoids and quadrupeds can exploit human-inspired em-bodiment to navigate steps and perform multi-contact loco-manipulation strategies that humans use daily. Recent ad-vancements have demonstrated the deployment of legged robots in various scenarios, highlighting both their applica-bility and growing market interest [1], [2], [3]. A major limitation of current legged systems lies in their limited payload capacity, often compromised in fa-vor of dynamic performance. To address this issue, hybrid wheel–legged platforms have been proposed as an effec-tive solution for reducing locomotion energy costs [4], [5]. Wheeled locomotion requires only a subset of actuators and avoids the need for continuous whole-body coordina-tion to maintain balance, while legged locomotion remains essential to achieve dynamic mobility in human-centered environments. Yet, quadrupeds are still far from matching human-like performance in heavy-payload task, an essen-tial requirement to substitute human operator in stressful scenarios, thus reducing the occurrence of injuries and ac-cidents. Furthermore, most of the quadruped embodiments comprehend a dynamic legged lower-body and has never been provided with bi-manual capabilities able to mimic the human characteristics.  

> 1Humanoids and Human Centered Mechatronics, Fondazione Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Via Morego 30, 16163, Genova, Italy
> 2Advanced Robotics Facility, Fondazione Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Via Morego 30, 16163, Genova, Italy

{name.surname }@iit.it 

> (a)
> (b)

Fig. 1: The KYON robot in 1a wheeled and 1b legged configuration. The rest of this paper presents the current SoA about high-payload quadruped robots in Sec.II. Then, the motor sizing for both the lower and upper-body actuators is described in Sec.III and Sec.IV, respectively. Sec.V and Sec.VI describe the mechatronics and control framework. Finally, Sec.VII presents a list of validative experiments to assess the final performance of the robot dealing with manipulation and locomotion tasks, and Sec.VIII summarizes the outcome of this letter. II. PREVIOUS WORK Wheeled and tracked robots, although characterized by fast locomotion and high payload capacity on flat surfaces,                                                              

> arXiv:2606.30243v1 [cs.RO] 29 Jun 2026 MOTOR PN(W)τc(N m )τp(N m )ωmax (rad s −1)M ( kg)
> 1:30 1:50 1:30 1:50 1:30 1:50 1:30 1:50 TBM-2G-08513D 734 37.1 55 99.9 166.5 16.2 9.7 0.94 0.64 RI100 T-Motor 720 39.6 55 111 185 14.3 8.6 1.04 0.74 RI80 T-Motor 492 39.6 55 111 185 8.7 5.2 1.04 0.74 TMCustom 8116 686 41.6 55 123.7 186 9.8 5.9 0.86 0.56 TMCustom 8120 1089 60.7 55 168.7 186 9.9 5.94 0.96 0.66

TABLE I: Motors and drive combinations selected for the lower-body design. Maximum torques are computed considering both motor and drive limits. The drives considered are the CPL series size 25 Harmonic drive ( N = 1 : 50 , τc =55 N m ,

τp =186 N m , m =0 .24 kg ) and the CPL series 32 Harmonic drive ( N = 1 : 30 , τc =75 N m , τp =200 N m , m =0 .54 kg ). Motor velocity limits are considered at the nominal voltage of 48 V .

Fig. 2: Link-side torques and velocities boxplots generated while trotting and stepping up. experience a significant drop in performance when operating on soft or uneven terrain. Legged robots have been regarded as a natural evolution, expanding robotic workspaces beyond confined and structured environments and enabling traversal across a wide variety of terrains. Boston Dynamics’ Big-Dog [6], WildCat [7], and LS3 [8] represent a clear milestone in this direction, as the first quadrupedal platforms capable of carrying substantial payloads in outdoor environments. These achievements were made possible by high power-density Internal Combustion Engines (ICEs) combined with hydraulic actuation. However, the exhaust emissions pro-duced by ICEs limit their use in indoor environments. The integration of electric motors with hydraulic actuation preserved high power density while eliminating the draw-backs associated with ICE-based power generation. Over the years, several hydraulically actuated robots have been developed. Notable examples include the HyQ series [9], [10], [11], developed at the Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia (IIT), which demonstrated remarkable power performance by pulling a stationary 3300 kg airplane. Similarly, SCalf [12] and Big Elephant [13], developed by Shandong University and Shanghai Jiao Tong University, respectively, were among the first robots to demonstrate fast trotting over challenging terrain and were also the first rideable quadrupeds. Operating hydraulically actuated robots requires regulating fluid flow, monitoring pressure levels, coordinating valve operation, and adjusting flow rates and pressure based on feedback signals to achieve the desired motion. Nevertheless, hydraulic drive systems are typically bulky, heavy, and noisy, which limits their widespread adoption. Recent advances in electric actuation have made elec-trically powered quadruped robots suitable for commercial applications, particularly in inspection and entertainment. Examples include Boston Dynamics’ Spot [1], ANYbotics’ ANYmal [2], and DEEP Robotics’ Lite, Lynx, and X Se-ries [14]. Compared to hydraulically actuated quadrupeds, electrically powered systems offer advantages such as a more compact design, lower noise levels, and simplified control. However, their reduced payload-to-weight ratio limits their deployment in demanding scenarios requiring advanced ma-nipulation capabilities. The limited manipulation capabilities of quadruped robots have been addressed from both hardware and software perspectives. On the hardware side, dedicated robotic arms can be mounted on quadrupeds to enable manipulation [15], [16]. However, this approach increases the overall mass and reduces the available payload capacity. As a result, most existing solutions incorporate a single arm, which restricts dexterous performance compared to human capabilities. To improve payload efficiency and locomotion performance, wheeled–quadrupedal manipulators have been introduced, reducing transportation costs while enabling fast and stable mobility [17]. Nevertheless, legged locomotion remains essential in highly cluttered environments where wheels may fail to establish reliable contact (e.g., climbing small steps or steep stepping stones). From a software perspective, approaches such as [18], [19] have proposed control strategies that allow interaction with objects using a leg or the whole body, without requiring external manipulators. However, these methods are limited to non-prehensile manipulation tasks, such as pushing and reorienting objects. In this work, we introduce KYON, a novel hybrid wheel-legged quadruped robot equipped with a bi-manual manipu-lation system and a steering-wheel mechanism. In particular, KYON features the following key design elements:  

> •

Semi-modular body design  

> •

Reconfigurable lower legs  

> •

Capability for both external and internal knee configu-rations  

> •

Omni-directional wheeled mobility • Bi-manual manipulation The distal wheeled modules are designed for straightforward replacement with standard passive legs, enabling more dy-namic motions by reducing the inertial properties of each limb for highly cluttered scenarios. With the wheeled con-figuration mounted, the robot has a total mass of 90 kg 

and a standing height of 0.8 m . Both the legs and arms are actuated with five DoFs each. The end-effectors are custom single-DoF, torque-controllable grippers. To the best of our knowledge, KYON is the first hybrid wheel-legged quadruped robot integrating a dedicated bi-manual system for high-performance manipulation. III. LOWER-BODY MOTOR SIZING The main objective of the lower-body motor sizing process was to meet the system-level requirements while respecting the imposed kinematic constraints. For actuator selection, the platform is required to trot at a nominal velocity of 1.0 m s −1 and to climb a 0.3 m step while carrying a nominal payload of 30 kg mounted on the base. The analysis started from a URDF model that included the kinematic structure together with an initial estimate of the mass distribution. This model was employed within the Optimal Control (OC) framework Horizon [20] to compute offline trajectories for the two locomotion tasks described above. The payload was represented in simulation by adding an additional URDF link with appropriate mass and inertia properties, rigidly attached to the base. The resulting trajec-tories were then evaluated in terms of link-side torques and velocities, which served as the primary metrics for motor and gearbox selection. Fig. 2 reports the link-side torque and velocity profiles, together with the mechanical power required during the trotting and step-climbing maneuvers. Based on this initial analysis, we pre-selected a set of motors whose nominal mechanical output exceeds the power required for the locomotion tasks, which is approximately 

150 W . To account for electrical and mechanical losses and to adopt a more conservative selection criterion, we further restricted the candidates to motors with a nominal mechanical output above 200 W . The lower-body simulations indicate a required continuous torque ranging between 50 a nd 

60 N m , with peaks exceeding 100 N m . Under these condi-tions, a 1 : 30 reduction ratio is generally not feasible, with the exception of the TMCustom 8120. In contrast, motors paired with a reduction ratio of N = 1 : 50 satisfy the torque requirements with a comfortable margin. However, among these options, only the TBM-2G-08513D and the RI100 provide sufficiently high output velocity. Among the available combinations, we selected the solution offering the highest maximum torque. This choice enables higher acceleration capability and provides additional margin for carrying heavier payloads, particularly considering the mass of the two arms and the steering wheel modules. IV. UPPER-BODY CODESIGN To meet the upper-body mass constraint, which is limited to 18 kg , we opted for a pair of 5-DoF arms. Each arm was 

Fig. 3: Box-plot of the base motion along the six-axes for the three arms’ configurations. designed with a total reach of 0.9 m , ensuring a sufficient workspace to perform the necessary manipulation tasks. The primary challenge of using an underactuated configu-ration—due to the omission of one joint—was identifying a joint layout that avoids kinematic singularities and maintains good manipulability in the frontal workspace. By limiting motion at the base, we reduce the torque demands on the legs, decreasing the likelihood of instability or falls during manipulation. To address this, we evaluated three potential arm configurations by observing base movement as the end-effector executed standard grasping motions within the frontal workspace. All three configurations shared a common structure: a yaw–pitch shoulder and a pitch elbow. The first design (YPYPY) featured an anthropomorphic shoulder, an additional proximal yaw joint, and a distal yaw joint acting as a wrist. The second and third configurations introduced a 2-DoF wrist to enhance end-effector control. One used a pitch–yaw wrist (YPPPY), while the other reversed the wrist joint sequence (YPPYP). For control, the robot utilized CartesI/O [21], a QP-based Inverse Kinematics (IK) solver. Cartesian trajectories were generated by manipulating an interactive marker in rViz, exploring a variety of end-effector poses for each candidate configuration. The corresponding base motion across six degrees of freedom is illustrated in Fig. 3. Tests showed that the YPPPY configuration resulted in the least base displacement during left-arm manipulation. To increase the overall reachable workspace and promote the engagement of pitch joints during bimanual tasks, the two arms were mounted with a 20 ◦ tilt relative to the vertical axis. To meet the resulting torque demands, the selected motor–drive combinations are listed in Tab. II. V. MECHATRONICS 

A. Leg subsystem 

Following the study of the existing four legs robotic platforms performed during the first months of the project the under development platform will make use of symmetrical MOTOR Joint N τc τp ωmax M                   

> (N m )(rad s −1)(kg )RI60 T-Motor 21:120 49 146.7 3.9 0.3 1, 3 1:100 39 110 4.7 0.27 RBE-1210A 4, 5 1:100 7.7 25.6 4.7 0.18

TABLE II: Motors and drive combinations selected for the upper-body design. Maximum torques are computed consid-ering both motor and drive limits. The drives considered are the CPL series size 20 Harmonic drive ( N = 1 : 120 , τc =49 N m , τp = 147 N m , m = 0 .14 kg ) and the CPL series 17 Harmonic drive ( N = 1 : 100 , τc = 39 N m , τp =110 N m , m = 0 .1 kg ), and the CSD series 14 harmonic drive (N = 1 : 100 , τc = 7 .7 N m , τp = 31 N m , m = 0 .06 kg ). Motor velocity limits are considered at the nominal voltage of 48 V . Joint numbering is in Fig. 7. 

Fig. 4: The two configurations of the leg showing the the wheel and foot type of end-effector employed in the two variants. legs in which the upper and the lower leg links have approximately the same length. In particular, the length of the upper leg was set to 0.346 m while the length of the lower leg from the knee joint to the interface of the foot or wheel end-effector was set to 0.3 m . This results in an overall leg length of 0.646 m without the wheel or the foot end-effector. Considering the wheel module the overall length of the leg including the wheel radius is 0.746 m . The overall mechanical assembly of the leg subsystem is introduced in Fig. 4. The upper leg module is common between the two leg con-figurations. It implements the main part of the leg kinematics that includes a hip complex with two degrees of freedom (DOFs) and a knee joint providing an additional degree of freedom. All the three joints of the upper leg are powered by the same type of actuator described earlier. The knee actuator torque and power is delivered to the knee joint through a secondary high power belt transmission system integrated in the output of the knee actuator (after the primary harmonic reduction drive), in Figure 5. To enable adequate tuning range of the pretension of the belt transmission two idler pretension pulley are considered, one placed at the back side (closely to the knee actuator) and one placed in the front side closely to the knee pulley flange. 

Fig. 5: The front side of the upper leg assembly showing the details of the belt transmission system and its components. 

Fig. 6: The lower leg wheel module showing the connection interface and the steering-wheel joints actuation. The two idler pretension pulleys are custom designed to reduce overall size and mass. The pretension mechanism is realized with the use of a fine thread screw that acts in a prismatic guide to constrain and control the position of the idler pulley with the respect to the belt. A belt pulley support plate has been considered and integrated to provide double support of the input (knee actuator side at the hip level) and output pulley (at the knee level) of the belt reducing the axial loading of the related bearings and increasing the stiffness of the overall upper leg assembly. As described earlier, the lower leg assembly will be produced in two configurations. The first configuration is composed by the lower leg cell structure, the wheel end-effector module and the wheel steering joint, Figure 6. The wheel steering joint is located at the level of the knee enabling the rotation of the lower leg cell and wheel along an axis that intersects with the wheel rotation axis. The steering joint is powered by the same actuation unit that is used in shoulder yaw and elbow joints of the arm. The lower leg cell in this configuration is connected to the output of the steering actuator and terminates to the interface where the wheel actuator is fixed. A tubeless tire is mounted on the output of the wheel actuator through the wheel flange interface. The tubeless rubber tire is fixed on the wheel flange using the clamping flange, Figure 6. The wheel tire diameter is 0.2 m trading off between wheel weight and capability to overcome terrain unevenness. The actuation of the wheel module is provided by a modified commercial actuator from Fig. 7: Overview of the dual arm upper body subsystem. TMotor company. In particular the actuation drive model AK80-8 was customized in terms of housing in order to be integrated inside the lower leg cell. The customization in the housing of the commercial drive targeted to realize a modular actuation- wheel module assembly while integrating the actuation drive in the lower leg cell. This enables a lightweight implementation that is critical for keeping low the weight of the wheel module while at the same time it enables easy exchange of the wheel tire component, e.g. for replacing with a larger diameter wheel. The second configuration comes with a passive lower leg link with a circular extremity to guarantee point contact at every angular position of the knee joint. 

B. Arm subsystem 

The arm module is composed of three distinct body sections presenting the upper arm, the lower arm and the wrist link sections. The length of the upper arm, lower arm and wrist sections is 0.32 m , 0.25 m , 0.13 m respectively resulting it a total arm length of 0.7 m . Finally, the length of the end-effector module is 0.2 m resulting in an overall length of the arm of 0.9 m when the end-effector is also included. The arms’ kinematics follows the joint scheme described in the previous section (Fig. 7. to extend the range of motion of the elbow joint, the upper arm and lower arm links are implemented to move on different planes permitting to significantly extend the range of motion of the elbow joint. This extended range of motion enables a compact stowed configurations for the arm module at the back of the robot pelvis when the arm module is not used. Furthermore, the range of motion for the joints of the arm were maximized at the extend possible during the design study to facilitate the manipulation motion range of the arm module. The shoulder yaw provides a range motion of 

[−160 , +160] deg . The range of motion of the shoulder pitch joint is [−125 , +125] deg while the elbow joint can move within the range of [−160 , +160] deg . Finally, the range of the wrist joints are [−80 , +80] deg and [−160 , +160] deg for the pitch and the roll joint respectively. For the interconnection of the actuator units, the arm design followed an exoskeleton link structure approach. Exoskeleton link cells have higher structural stiffness and minimize the effect of unmeasured elasticity. In the principle of the exoskeleton link structure and actuation integration, the body of the actuators are floating inside this exoskeleton cell structure while the actuation drives are fixed to the struc-tures of the previous and next link. In particular, the actuation modules are mechanically interfaced to the exoskeleton link cell structures using two flange interfaces in the body of the actuation drive, one fixed to the previous link and the other to the subsequent link. The design of the shoulder integrates two joints, the shoulder yaw and the shoulder pitch joint. The body of the actuator is mounted on the upper body mounting structure while the output flange of the shoulder yaw drive is fixed to the structure cell that embraces the shoulder pitch joint. The motor driver of the shoulder yaw drive is placed inside the upper body mounting structure. A fork cell structure that provides double support on the shoulder pitch joint is employed to enhance structural stiffness in this proximal joint of the robot arm. The output flange of the shoulder pitch actuation drive is fixed to one side of the fork cell while the body of the actuation drive is fixed to the upper arm link cell. As a result, the body shoulder pitch actuation drive is rotating together with the upper arm link cell. The choice of this mounting was made to facilitate the wiring between the shoulder pitch actuation drive and its motor driver electronics, which are fixed in the upper arm link cell structure. The upper arm link cell structure therefore integrates the body of the shoulder pitch actuation drive at one end, and the elbow pitch actuation drive at the distal end. The elbow joint links the upper arm section with the lower arm section, whose actuator is fixed in the upper arm link cell structure while the output flange of the elbow actuation drive is connected to the lower arm link cell structure. The lower arm link cell structure integrates the body of the wrist pitch actuation drive at its distal end. The motor driver of the wrist pitch actuator is located inside the lower arm link structure facilitating the wiring from the actuator to the motor driver electronics. Finally, the wrist link represents the last section of the arm subsystem. The wrist link cell structure is connected to the output of the wrist pitch actuation drive and houses the wrist roll actuator that drives the last joint of the arm. The motor driver of the last joint is located inside the wrist link cell structure at the height of the wrist pitch connection flange. In the output of the wrist roll actuator a wrist flange providing a modular interconnection interface permits the quick mounting and removal of the end-effector. The end-effector module of the arm is based on a custom modular gripper design composed of a main gripper module and a pair of modular jaws. In this modular jaw-type gripper the bottom jaw is fixed while the top jaw is powered by a single actuator. Both the bottom and top jaw have been designed and integrated into the main module of the gripper in a modular/re-configurable manner, permitting to interchange or replace jaws with others of different geometry if required to adapt the jaw geometry to the shape and size of a particular object to grasp or for providing different mechanical properties in the jaws, e.g. by fabricating the jaws from different softer material. VI. SOFTWARE AND CONTROL ARCHITECTURE Kyon’s software architecture is based on a combination of model-based and learning algorithm to manage locomotion and manipulation tasks independently. For legged locomotion purposes, we developed a high-level controller based on a Deep Reinforcement Learning policy to handle unmodeled events coming from the environment. The high-level control policy is trained using the Mujoco XLA (MJX) framework randomizing the delay of each actuator to simulate the communication delays and the safety low-pass filter of our middle-level controller. Additionally, domain randomization is performed on each body and actuator of the robot articu-lation, including mass, inertia, friction, and actuator’s gains. The policy takes in input a planar velocity command vector 

ˆvb ∈ SE (2) and it is trained using an asymmetric actor-critic agent. The actor inputs noisy proprioceptive information 

ot ∈ R including the base angular velocity B ωb ∈ R3, the projected gravity vector g ∈ R3, the joint positions relative to the initial one q ∈ R12 , the joint position error of the last three steps (q − ˆq) ∈ R3·12 , the position of each of the i-th foot in base frame B pc,i ∈ R4·3, the velocity command ˆvB ∈

SE (2) , the phase vector to track the desired gait frequency as in [22] φi ∈ R4·3, and the previous action executed 

at−1 ∈ R12 . The critic inputs the same denoised observation as the actor, plus some privileged information like the base linear velocity and angular accelerations vb, ab ∈ R3, joint velocities and torques ˙q, τ ∈ R12 , the contact state and cartesian velocity ci, vc,i ∈ R4·3, and the force applied to the base Fb ∈ R3 to teach the robot to react to random external disturbances. The policy generates joint position references for the lower-body joints only ˆq ∈ R12 , and sent to the middleware 

XBot2 [23], which forward joint references and actuator gains both to simulation environment, like Mujoco, and the real robot. This allows the sim-to-sim and sim-to-real validation without changing any part of the inference code. In both cases, joint position references are used to compute joint impedance torques: 

τ = K(ˆq − q) − D ˙q (1) These torques are then forwarded as a reference for each actuator. VII. EXPERIMENTS In this section, we present a series of experiments aimed at evaluating the robot’s performance and validating the design decisions made during the codesign phase. The locomo-tion and manipulation controllers are implemented as two independent modules. The locomotion controller employs a whole-body Model Predictive Controller (MPC), which extends the Trajectory Optimization (TO) framework used during the design phase through a receding horizon formu-lation. Alternatively, the trained policy described in Sec.VI can be inferenced. In contrast, the manipulation controller relies on whole-body inverse kinematics (IK) to control and teleoperate one or both arms simultaneously. Additionally, a simplified omni-steering controller has been implemented for basic wheeled-navigation. This module operates on the two degrees of freedom of each wheel, converting Cartesian velocity references for the base into joint velocities while keeping the rest of the body stationary. 

A. Steering wheels 

To evaluate the advantage of incorporating steering joints, we compared the cost of transport of the robot while follow-ing a predefined path, both with and without steering enabled. In the first scenario, the robot achieves holonomic motion using all eight wheel joints, whereas in the second scenario it must perform additional maneuvers—such as adjusting its heading or stepping sideways—to change direction. The con-figuration with rolling joints only uses a lower leg equipped with a single distal motor for wheel actuation, resulting in a weight reduction of approximately 1.5 kg compared to the 2-DoF wheel module. The comparison is conducted by driving the robot along a predefined trajectory that requires omnidirectional motion. The robot with steering joints employs a simple controller that maps a Cartesian velocity reference into joint-space commands for both steering and wheel joints. Given a veloc-ity command ˆv = [ vT

> cmd

, ω T

> cmd

]T = [ vx, v y , 0, 0, 0, ω z ]T , the reference velocity for each wheel is computed as vwheel ,i =

vcmd + ωcmd × pi, where pi denotes the vector from the base frame to the i-th wheel frame. The rolling velocity and steering angle for each wheel are then given by 

˙qroll ,i = vwheel ,i 

r (2) 

qsteering ,i = atan2( vwheel ,iy , vwheel ,ix ) (3) The wheeled robot without steering joints, instead, uses a policy similar to the one described in previous section, with an action space enlarged with four extra velocity terms for the wheel continuous joints. In this way, the policy learns to use the wheel joints for forward and backward motions, while involving the legs’ joints for steering and lateral motion. To quantify the benefits of steering, the robot is com-manded to follow the path illustrated in Fig. 8. The trajectory consists of a 10 m straight segment, followed by a 90 ◦ turn, and then another 10 m straight segment leading to a circular path with a radius of 5 m . This setup enables a comparison of the two configurations over trajectories that include both sharp turns and smooth curves.ng the Cost of Transport (CoT) when completing the path in the two ways. The CoT is computed using the classic velocity formulation: 

COT = Pmgv = τavg · ˙qTavg 

mgv (4) with P being the average mechanical power, m the mass of the robot, g the magnitude of the gravity vector, and v

the average of the base planar velocity. Despite the reduced weight of the quadruped without steering joints, the CoT in this configuration is 0.305 , while the robot with steer-ing joints performs the two-ways path with a CoT equal Fig. 8: The path used to compare the wheeled platform with and without the steering joints. to 0.102 , highlighting the beneficial of mounting steering joints. 

B. Locomotion 

To validate the actuator selection and mechanical design, we ran the robot in its legged configuration using our whole-body MPC and commanded it to trot at a steady speed of 

1.0 m s −1. The resulting link-side torques and velocities are shown in Fig. 9. Compared to the design-phase simulation results, we observe a consistent trend: the hip-roll joint bears the highest torque loads, while the knee-pitch joint exhibits the fastest movements. However, the experimental results show a roughly 20% increase in torque, which can be attributed to variations in motor efficiency across different torque output levels, as well as for the estimated weights of the simplified model which slightly changed during the final design. The zero-shot transfer of the trained policy has been tested both in an indoor and outdoor environment. Despite the policy has been trained on flat terrains, it has been tested on the real robot on surfaces with varying slopes and terrains. This experiments are intended to validate the trained policy on the real robot only, and consequently its locomotion performance. They are not shown to assess the performance of the training process, which will be investigated in future works. In a controlled environment, before bringing the robot outdoor, we used a treadmill with adjustable slopes and speed and run the policy to follow the target speeds. Assessing that the robot was able to follow the changes in environment without triggering any safety action from the low-level controller, we decided to bring the robot in a challenging mountain environment. There, challenges derives not only from the changes in slope, but also from the roughness of the the terrain and by the varying friction conditions of different materials encountered (i.e., stones, mud, and grass). Videos of the locomotion experiments are in the attached media file. 

C. Bi-manual manipulation 

The upper-body was evaluated in a demanding task in which the robot was instructed to lift a 15 kg barbell from the ground to a height of 1.2 m , reaching a position just above the pelvis. The initial and final poses during the lifting motion are depicted in Fig. 10. To assess the system’s 

Fig. 9: Torques and velocities generated during the trot experiment. 

Fig. 10: Initial and final configuration during the bi-manual grasping experiment lifting 15 kg 

Fig. 11: Link-side torques generated by the left arm during the bi-manual grasping experiment capabilities, we measured the joint torques produced by the left arm during the lift, shown in Fig. 11. When compared with the peak torque ratings listed in Tab. II, the results indicate that the robot has significant torque headroom, suggesting it could handle even heavier loads. VIII. CONCLUSIONS In this work, we presented KYON, a novel hybrid wheel–legged quadruped robot equipped with a bi-manual upper body, specifically designed to address high-payload loco-manipulation tasks. The paper detailed the systematic design and co-design methodology adopted to define both the kinematic structure and actuator selection of the lower and upper body, guided by task-driven performance requirements. Furthermore, the control framework for the execution of locomotion and manipulation tasks is provided. The experimental validation demonstrated the effective-ness of the proposed design choices. In particular, loco-motion experiments confirmed the platform’s capability to achieve stable and dynamic motion, while the bi-manual manipulation task highlighted the robot’s ability to handle significant payloads with substantial torque margins. These results indicate that KYON not only satisfies the initial de-sign specifications but also provides additional performance headroom for more demanding applications. Future work will focus on further exploring the limits of the platform, including a comprehensive assessment of maxi-mum achievable locomotion speed and payload capacity. Ad-ditionally, more advanced loco-manipulation scenarios will be investigated to fully exploit the potential of the combined wheeled–legged mobility and bi-manual capabilities. ACKNOWLEDGMENT The robot has been developed thanks to the support of the commercial agreement with CETC and SAT. REFERENCES [1] B. Dynamics, “Spot,” 2023. [Online]. Available: https://www. bostondynamics.com/spot [2] ANYbotics, “Anymal x.” [Online]. Available: https://www.anybotics. com/robotics/anymal-x/ [3] Unitree, “B2.” [Online]. Available: https://www.unitree.com/b2 [4] N. Kashiri, L. Baccelliere, L. Muratore, A. Laurenzi, Z. Ren, E. M. Hoffman, M. Kamedula, G. F. Rigano, J. Malzahn, S. Cordasco, P. Guria, A. Margan, and N. G. Tsagarakis, “Centauro: A hybrid locomotion and high power resilient manipulation platform,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 1595–1602, 2019. [5] G. Valsecchi, N. Rudin, L. Nachtigall, K. Mayer, F. Tischhauser, and M. Hutter, “Barry: A high-payload and agile quadruped robot,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , vol. 8, pp. 6939–6946, 2023. [6] M. Raibert, K. Blankespoor, G. Nelson, and R. Playter, “Bigdog, the rough-terrain quadruped robot,” IFAC Proceedings Volumes ,vol. 41, no. 2, pp. 10 822–10 825, 2008, 17th IFAC World Congress. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/ S1474667016407020 [7] B. Dynamics, “Introducing wildcat,” 2013. [Online]. Available: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wE3fmFTtP9g [8] ——, “Ls3 - legged squad support system,” 2012. [Online]. Available: https://youtu.be/R7ezXBEBE6U [9] C. Semini, N. G. Tsagarakis, E. Guglielmino, and D. G. Caldwell, “Design and experimental evaluation of the hydraulically actuated prototype leg of the hyq robot,” in 2010 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems , 2010, pp. 3640–3645. [10] C. Semini, N. G. Tsagarakis, E. Guglielmino, M. Focchi, F. Cannella, and D. G. Caldwell, “Design of hyq – a hydraulically and electrically actuated quadruped robot,” Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers, Part I: Journal of Systems and Control Engineering , vol. 225, no. 6, pp. 831–849, 2011. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1177/0959651811402275 [11] C. Semini, V. Barasuol, J. Goldsmith, M. Frigerio, M. Focchi, Y. Gao, and D. G. Caldwell, “Design of the hydraulically actuated, torque-controlled quadruped robot hyq2max,” IEEE/ASME Transactions on Mechatronics , vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 635–646, 2017. [12] H. Chai, J. Meng, X. Rong, and Y. Li, “Design and implementation of scalf, an advanced hydraulic quadruped robot,” vol. 36, pp. 385–391, 07 2014. [13] S. J. T. University, “Baby elephant robot can carry people,” 2014. [Online]. Available: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Iioy1e pJUI [14] D. Robotics, “The lite, lynx and x series.” [Online]. Available: https://www.deeprobotics.cn/en [15] Z. Fu, X. Cheng, and D. Pathak, “Deep whole-body control: Learning a unified policy for manipulation and locomotion,” in Proceedings of The 6th Conference on Robot Learning , ser. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, K. Liu, D. Kulic, and J. Ichnowski, Eds., vol. 205. PMLR, 14–18 Dec 2023, pp. 138–149. [Online]. Available: https://proceedings.mlr.press/v205/fu23a.html [16] M. Mittal, D. Hoeller, F. Farshidian, M. Hutter, and A. Garg, “Articulated object interaction in unknown scenes with whole-body mobile manipulation,” in 2022 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) , 2022, pp. 1647–1654. [17] K. Jiang, Z. Fu, J. Guo, W. Zhang, and H. Chen, “Learning whole-body loco-manipulation for omni-directional task space pose tracking with a wheeled-quadrupedal-manipulator,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 1481–1488, 2025. [18] J. Stolle, P. Arm, M. Mittal, and M. Hutter, “Perceptive pedipulation with local obstacle avoidance,” in 2024 IEEE-RAS 23rd International Conference on Humanoid Robots (Humanoids) , 2024, pp. 157–164. [19] Y. Feng, C. Hong, Y. Niu, S. Liu, Y. Yang, and D. Zhao, “Learning multi-agent loco-manipulation for long-horizon quadrupedal pushing,” in 2025 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , 2025, pp. 14 441–14 448. [20] F. Ruscelli, A. Laurenzi, N. G. Tsagarakis, and E. Mingo Hoffman, “Horizon: A trajectory optimization framework for robotic systems,” Frontiers in Robotics and AI , vol. Volume 9 -2022, 2022. [Online]. Available: https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/ robotics-and-ai/articles/10.3389/frobt.2022.899025 [21] A. Laurenzi, E. M. Hoffman, L. Muratore, and N. G. Tsagarakis, “Cartesi/o: A ros based real-time capable cartesian control framework,” in 2019 International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) ,2019, pp. 591–596. [22] J. Lee, J. Hwangbo, L. Wellhausen, V. Koltun, and M. Hutter, “Learning quadrupedal locomotion over challenging terrain,” Science Robotics , vol. 5, no. 47, p. eabc5986, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.science.org/doi/abs/10.1126/scirobotics.abc5986 [23] A. Laurenzi, D. Antonucci, N. G. Tsagarakis, and L. Muratore, “The xbot2 real-time middleware for robotics,” Robotics and Autonomous Systems , vol. 163, p. 104379, 2023. [Online]. Available: https: //www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0921889023000180