Title: Instant-Fold: In-Context Imitation Learning for Deformable Object Manipulation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.04269v1

Published Time: Thu, 04 Jun 2026 00:25:02 GMT

Number of Pages: 35

Markdown Content:
# Instant-Fold: In-Context Imitation Learning for Deformable Object Manipulation 

Yilong Wang 

The Robot Learning Lab Imperial College London yw14218@ic.ac.uk 

Cheng Qian 

The Robot Learning Lab Imperial College London c.qian24@imperial.ac.uk 

Edward Johns 

The Robot Learning Lab Imperial College London e.johns@imperial.ac.uk 

Abstract: Deformable object manipulation (DOM) is challenging due to high-dimensional, partially observable states that evolve through long-horizon, topology-changing interactions with multiple valid manipulation modes. We in-troduce Instant-Fold , an in-context imitation learning framework for DOM. Given a single human demonstration, our policy infers and executes diverse manipula-tion modes directly from the demonstration—including variations in spatial execu-tion and ordering—without requiring gradient updates. Our approach first learns deformation-aware visual representations via temporal contrastive pretraining, af-ter which a flow-matching transformer policy conditioned on the demonstration predicts actions to execute the intended manipulation mode. Trained entirely in simulation, Instant-Fold generalizes across diverse folding modes and transfers zero-shot to real-world settings without additional data collection or finetuning. Videos are available at https://instant-fold.github.io .

Keywords: Deformable Object Manipulation, In-Context Imitation Learning, Contrastive Representation Learning Instantly execute closed -loop policy following the desired mode. A human demonstration defines the desired folding mode .

Figure 1: Given a single human demonstration as a prompt, I NSTANT -F OLD infers and executes diverse manipulation modes directly from the demonstration without requiring gradient updates. 

## 1 Introduction 

Deformable objects have high-dimensional, partially observable states that evolve through long-horizon, topologically complex interactions. As a result, they admit multiple valid manipulation modes depending on personal preferences, as shown in Figure 1. The differences are reflected not only in the final configuration, but also in the sequence of intermediate deformations required to achieve it. While such procedures can be specified in language, they are difficult to specify pre-cisely and compactly. In practice, humans rarely rely on verbal instructions alone when teaching 

> arXiv:2606.04269v1 [cs.RO] 2 Jun 2026

complex deformable skills; instead, demonstrations, often in the form of videos, are used to com-municate temporal structure, intermediate goals, and subtle spatial conventions that are cumbersome to verbalize. This observation motivates our central premise: for DOM, a single demonstration can provide a richer task interface than language, particularly when the goal is to specify how an object should be manipulated rather than merely what final state should be achieved. By training on a sufficiently diverse set of modes, a model can, in principle, learn to infer and reproduce the same mode from a single unseen demonstration via the emergence of In-Context Learning (ICL) [1]. A key challenge in making this formulation work is representation. Foundational vision models are typically trained on large-scale internet images under implicit i.i.d. assumptions [2], which do not naturally extend to DOM. As an object deforms, its visual appearance and feature representation can change dramatically even when the underlying physical entity remains the same. While such variability may be tolerable when learning a single fixed mode, it becomes a major obstacle for generalization: different valid manipulation modes can induce substantially different deformation trajectories, which a model may incorrectly interpret as entirely different tasks rather than variations within the same task family. A further challenge is data. ICL in language and vision emerged from massive, diverse datasets, yet no comparable corpus exists for DOM. Generalizing to unseen deformation trajectories requires exposure to broad variation in object geometry, intermediate states, and manipulation modes, but the space of possible deformations is effectively unbounded, making such coverage prohibitively expensive and difficult to specify in the real world. Motivated by these challenges, we propose I NSTANT -F OLD , an In-Context Imitation Learning (ICIL) framework for DOM. Our approach explicitly separates topological and functional reason-ing: we first learn deformation-aware representations via temporal contrastive pretraining, capturing correspondences that persist under non-rigid transformations; we then learn reactive control with a flow-matching transformer that conditions on demonstrations to infer task intent. Both components are trained entirely in simulation. We instantiate our framework on clothes folding tasks, where a single object category admits multiple valid modes with distinct temporal structures. Our contributions are threefold: (1) we formulate DOM as an ICIL problem and introduce a flow-matching transformer architecture for long-horizon deformable in-context manipulation; (2) we pro-pose a temporal contrastive pretraining method tailored to ICIL for learning topology-consistent representations; and (3) we demonstrate successful sim-to-real transfer without any real-world data. 

## 2 Related Work 

Representation for Deformable Objects. Representations for deformable objects can be broadly grouped into particle-based [3–6], mesh-based [7, 8], keypoint-based [9–13], and learned latent or implicit state representations [14–18]. Keypoint-based representations are widely adopted for downstream planning and control [9–12] due to their compactness and computational efficiency. However, existing keypoints are typically either geometric [19, 20] or semantic [9, 11], limiting their ability to simultaneously preserve spatial fidelity and task-relevant structure, while their sparsity can lead to loss of fine-grained details and sensitivity to occlusions. In contrast, we represent deformable objects as a compact set of geo-semantic tokens, each consisting of a 3D position and a pretrained deformation-aware semantic feature, processed within a transformer architecture. 

Sim-to-Real Clothes Folding. A major line of work addresses sim-to-real clothes folding using parameterized action primitives such as pick, place, and fling, where policies predict grasp points or affordances from visual observations [9, 12, 21–24]. These structured action spaces improve stability and data efficiency but typically decompose tasks into sequential, open-loop executions with limited adaptability. Complementary approaches learn policies without discrete primitives, including flow-based and model-predictive methods [25–27], which improve flexibility and closed-loop control but rely on high-dimensional observations or task-specific geometric representations, limiting the use of compact state abstractions for downstream policy learning. In this work, we train an in-context imitation learning policy in simulation and deploy it zero-shot in the real world. 2In-Context Imitation Learning (ICIL). ICIL enables task adaptation by conditioning on one or a few demonstrations at test time, without gradient-based fine-tuning. Existing approaches achieve this via explicit alignment between demonstrated and current observations [28–31], meta-learning methods that infer task context from demonstrations [32], and foundation-model-based approaches using structured representations [33]. More recently, ICIL has been formulated as next-token pre-diction conditioned on demonstrations [34, 35], as well as diffusion-based graph generation [36], enabling more scalable and expressive conditioning for manipulation. However, these methods fo-cus on rigid-body settings, where object states can often be approximated by low-dimensional pose representations. In contrast, deformable manipulation requires reasoning over high-dimensional, continuously evolving observations and manipulation procedures. Our work extends ICIL to this setting with a novel architecture for long-horizon dual-arm deformable manipulation. 

## 3 Method 

Figure 2 provides an overview of our method. I NSTANT -F OLD consists of two stages: deformation-aware temporal contrastive pretraining, which learns correspondence-preserving visual tokens, and in-context policy learning, which conditions action generation on demonstration context. Intuitively, the pretrained tokenizer captures how cloth geometry and appearance evolve under deformation, the context encoder infers the intended manipulation procedure from demonstrations, and the action decoder predicts how both arms should move to realize that procedure from the current state. Temporal     

> Contrastive
> Loss
> MLP
> MLP
> 3D Tokens
> Image
> Depth
> DINO LoRA
> Unproject & FPS
> Project
> N points
> Attach Positions
> 1. Temporal Contrastive Pretraining
> 2. In -Context Policy Learning
> Demonstration States Current States
> Noisy Trajectory
> Tokens
> Context Encoder
> Denoising Step 𝒾
> Demonstration Tokens Current Tokens
> Flow  Matching  Decoder
> Velocity Fields
> Gripper open Gripper close
> Proprioception Encoder Pretrained Cloth Encoder
> Shared State Encoder

Figure 2: Overview of I NSTANT -F OLD . (1) We first pretrain a deformation-aware tokenizer with temporal contrastive supervision, lifting masked RGB-D observations into geo-semantic 3D cloth tokens. (2) During policy learning, the shared encoders tokenize both the demonstration and cur-rent observations, aggregates dense spatio-temporal demonstration context, and conditions a flow-matching denoising transformer to reconstruct clean dual-arm action trajectories from noises. 

Deformable Representation. We adopt a geometry-first representation for deformable observa-tions. Given a masked RGB-D observation, we back-project valid depth pixels into a 3D point cloud in the camera frame and use Farthest Point Sampling (FPS) to select N points that cover the gar-ment surface. These sampled 3D points are projected back to the image plane, and visual features are extracted from the pretrained image encoder at the projected pixel locations using bilinear inter-polation. Each cloth token consists of a 3D position together with its associated semantic feature. 33.1 Temporal Contrastive Pretraining 

Effective deformable manipulation requires a visual representation that is sensitive to topological state changes, such as folding and crumpling, while remaining robust to nuisance variation such as texture and lighting. We therefore introduce Temporal Contrastive Pretraining , a self-supervised objective that leverages dense particle-based simulator geometry [37] to learn a deformation-aware visual encoder from the same simulated trajectory corpus used for downstream policy learning. As shown in Figure 3, to ground visual features in physical dynamics, we use particle geometry to define correspondence targets for visual tokens. Our goal is to keep tokens corresponding to the same physical cloth location close in feature space under non-rigid deformation across time.  

> (a) Same-cloth geometric matching. (b) Cross-cloth semantic matching.

Figure 3: Illustration of Temporal Contrastive Pretraining with a batch size of two trajectories. (a) Same-cloth matching uses nearest-particle assignment to provide dense correspondence su-pervision across frames and trajectories of the same cloth. (b) Cross-cloth matching uses sparse semantic keypoints for supervision across different cloth instances. We optimize a soft weighted contrastive objective with dense negatives from other valid tokens in the comparison set. 

Loss Function. Let u = ( m, t, i ) index token i at frame t in trajectory m, and let zu ∈ RD denote its ℓ2-normalized feature. For a set of trajectories S sharing the same cloth identity, let π(u) denote the nearest visible simulator particle assigned to token u in 3D. Positives for anchor u are tokens from the same cloth-identity pool that are assigned to the same particle, 

P(u) = {v̸ = u : π(v) = π(u)}. (1) We propose a soft-weighted supervised contrastive loss [38], 

Lsame = − 1

|A| 

X

> u∈A

X

> v∈P (u)

¯wu,v log exp( z⊤ 

> u

zv /τ )

P 

> v′∈C (u)

exp( z⊤ 

> u

zv′ /τ ) . (2) Here, A contains anchors with at least one visible positive, τ is the temperature, and ¯wu,v are nor-malized positive weights derived from mutual visibility and Gaussian token-to-particle assignment confidence. The comparison set C(u) contains valid non-self tokens in the denominator. To promote transfer across garments, we add a cross-cloth contrastive term using sparse semantic keypoints. Since particle identities are not shared across garments, keypoint labels provide cross-instance correspondence. We form each keypoint feature from nearby visual tokens, treat matching keypoints across garments as positives, and use dense in-batch tokens from other garments as nega-tives. The full objective is hence Lpretrain = 12 Lsame + 12 Lcross . More details are in Appendix B. 

Encoder Training. We instantiate the encoder with a frozen DINOv3 backbone [2], aggregate features from multiple transformer depths, adapt the final blocks with LoRA [39], and train a lightweight projection and contrastive head during pretraining. To stabilize optimization and guar-antee same-cloth positives within each batch, we use strict PK sampling [40], where each batch contains P cloth identities and K trajectories per cloth. After pretraining, the contrastive head is discarded, while the LoRA adapters and projection module are transferred to policy learning. 

3.2 In-Context Policy Learning 

We cast DoM as an in-context trajectory generation problem. Given the current observation ot =(vt, qt) ∈ Rdv × Rdq , where vt denotes the visual state of the deformable object and qt the robot 4proprioception, and a context keyframe sequence C = ( c1, . . . , cK ), ck = ( vdemo  

> k

, qdemo  

> k

) ∈

Rdv × Rdq , extracted from a single demonstration, the model parameterizes the conditional distri-bution pθ (at:t+H−1 | ot, C) , where at:t+H−1 ∈ RH×da is the action trajectory over horizon H.

Context Keyframes. We automatically extract context keyframes from a single demonstration using end-effector state events, such as binary gripper open/close transitions, following prior work [41, 42]. These keyframes summarize temporally distinct object deformation phases while preserving the keypose robot interaction structure that disambiguates the intended folding mode. 

Action Representation. Each robot state is represented by its Cartesian position (x, y, z ) ∈ R3

and binary openness o ∈ { 0, 1}, with per-gripper action ∆agt = (∆ x, ∆y, ∆z, o ) ∈ R3 × { 0, 1}

for g ∈ { L, R }, giving the full bimanual action at = (∆ aLt , ∆aRt ) ∈ R8. States and actions are represented in the camera frame following [43], which serves as a shared reference across both arms. 

3D Relative Attention. Robot state and noisy action tokens are embedded by separate projections while retaining their 3D coordinates. Since cloth, robot states, and noisy action tokens share a common camera-centric 3D frame, we apply relative attention [42] in the geometry-bearing attention blocks using RoPE [44], allowing attention logits to encode relative positional information. 

Context Encoder. The context encoder maps the context keyframes C into a structured representa-tion of intermediate geometry and bimanual interaction. Each keyframe is lifted into cloth tokens via a shared frozen visual tokenizer and concatenated with keypose robot-state tokens. A spatial-then-temporal backbone first applies per-frame spatial attention to model local cloth–robot interactions, then mixes tokens across all keyframes with dense spatio-temporal self-attention. We introduce three context encoding mechanisms: (i) 3D ALiBI [45] biases spatial attention toward nearby cloth–robot pairs, grounding cross-modal interactions in 3D geometry; (ii) learned summary tokens distill the demonstration into compact global tokens, reducing the decoder burden of inferring long-horizon intent from many low-level tokens; and (iii) state-event tokens preserve end-effector gripper events, preventing sparse grasp and release cues from being diluted by the larger cloth-token representation. 

Flow Matching Action Decoder. The decoder first fuses encoded demonstration context and current-scene tokens through cross-attention, producing demonstration-conditioned scene tokens. Noisy trajectory tokens then cross-attend to the scene context formed by concatenating these scene tokens with state-event tokens, and are further refined by joint self-attention. The denoising timestep and current proprioceptive state are encoded by separate MLPs and injected via AdaLN [46], con-ditioning the decoder on both diffusion time and the current bimanual state. An auxiliary keypose prediction task prepends noisy next-keypose tokens to the noisy trajectory tokens; these tokens are decoded with separate position and gripper heads and supervised as short-horizon subgoals. We train the decoder with rectified flow matching [47] over Cartesian positions and binary cross-entropy over gripper openness. Let x denote the expert Cartesian trajectory and ϵ ∼ N (0 , I ). We sample t ∈ [0 , 1] and form the interpolant zt = (1 − t)x + tϵ. The training objective is 

L = Et, x,ϵ,C

h

∥vθ (zt, t | ot, C) − (ϵ − x)∥22 + BCE(ˆ g, g)

i

+ λkp Lkp , (3) where ˆg are predicted gripper-openness logits, g are ground-truth gripper labels, and Lkp applies the same losses to the auxiliary keypose prediction. Architecture details are in Appendix C. 

## 4 Experiments 

We evaluate I NSTANT -F OLD in simulation and on a real dual-arm robot. Our experiments address six questions: (1) Does temporal contrastive pretraining improve deformable object representation quality? (2) If so, how does it affect downstream in-context policy learning? (3) For in-context clothes folding, is demonstration conditioning more effective than language conditioning? (4) Are our design choices effective? (5) How does performance scale with context diversity? (6) How does the final system compare with prior clothes folding methods in simulation and on real garments? 5Way 1 L - Step 1 Way 1 L - Step 2 Way 1 L - Step 3 Way 1 L - Step 4 Way 2 L - Step 1 Way 2 L - Step 2 Way 2 L - Step 3 Way 2 L - Step 4 Figure 4: Visualizations of our pretrained cloth encoder on real-world demonstrations. A shared PCA basis is fit to the token features and projected back onto clothes. For comparison, see Figure 7. 

Data Generation. We generate demonstrations in a FleX-based simulator [48] with a top-down RGB-D camera and 360 Cloth3D top meshes [49], split into 300 training and 60 held-out meshes. Each trajectory is defined by a folding context: sleeve primitive, body-fold primitive, and execu-tion order. We define 19 modes with valid order variants (Figure 12) and generate 12 trajectories per mesh per mode, evenly split across variants, yielding 4K trajectories per mode and 80K total. Domain randomization covers camera, appearance, initial gripper poses, cloth drop, sleeve distur-bances, and wrinkle-like noise fields. For representation pretraining, we add about 40K pretraining-only trajectories from semantic-random deformation modes that drag garment regions without defin-ing a folding task. Our main policy benchmark trains on 8 modes (modes 1–6, 9, 11) and evaluates on both seen folds and held-out folds (modes 7, 8, 10). More details are in Appendix A. 

4.1 Representation Pretraining Preprocessing. For each trajectory, we first filter out static cloth frames by requiring that at least 15% of cloth particles move more than 2 cm between consecutive frames. We then uniformly sub-sample overly long sequences to a fixed frame budget of 15 to maintain realistic VRAM usage. 

Training Details. We use FPS to sample N=64 points. During training, we load only the retained frame indices. We train on a single RTX PRO 6000 Blackwell, using LoRA with rank 32 on the query and value projections of the last 4 transformer blocks of DINOv3-ViT-S/16+ backbone, to-gether with 4-layer feature aggregation from blocks 3,6,9,12. Each optimization step uses P=12 cloths and K=8 trajectories per cloth, yielding an effective batch of 96 trajectories. This corresponds to up to 1,440 RGB-D frames (92,160 cloth tokens) per step, with average VRAM of 73.3 GB. 

Results. As detailed in Appendix B, our dense-negative temporal formulation with the soft objec-tive consistently achieves the strongest overall performance among the pretraining variants. Figure 4 shows that the learned encoder transfers effectively from simulation to real-world settings. By com-parison (Figure 7), DINOv3 produces markedly less temporally consistent representations, while our method yields representations that are both more temporally consistent and spatially coherent than those produced by the pairwise contrastive formulation of [12], even without real-world adaptation. 

4.2 Policy Learning Conditioning variants and baselines. We compare language-conditioned and demonstration-conditioned policies under three pretraining settings: no visual pretraining, pretraining on the same 8 policy-training modes, and full pretraining on 16 folding modes plus random deformation modes. The held-out policy contexts are excluded from all pretraining and policy training. 6Table 1: Policy results on 60 held-out garments over 32 folding contexts (1920 rollouts). Ctx. Acc. is context-following accuracy. C-SR@95 is conditional success: a rollout must follow the re-quested context and satisfy the oracle-calibrated 95th-percentile geometric success threshold. Geom. is semantic geometric completion error, and W1 is the Wasserstein-1 distance to the oracle final state.                                                                                                                                                 

> Cond. Pretrain Seen Folds Held-out Folds
> Ctx. Acc. ↑C-SR@95 ↑Geom. ↓W1↓Ctx. Acc. ↑C-SR@95 ↑Geom. ↓W1↓
> Lang. –92.2 ±2.2 35.3 ±5.5 2.26 ±0.21 .157 75.0 ±2.6 20.2 ±4.0 3.36 ±1.38 .280 Lang. Full 99.0 ±0.6 40.4 ±5.5 2.05 ±0.18 .108 92.0 ±2.3 28.7 ±4.4 2.97 ±1.24 .200 Demo –91.1 ±1.3 59.5 ±3.9 1.57 ±0.11 .057 73.5 ±2.0 42.3 ±4.2 2.24 ±1.01 .140 Demo 8-mode 98.6 ±0.8 68.2 ±4.1 1.41 ±0.09 .045 91.8 ±2.5 43.5 ±5.3 2.13 ±0.60 .137 Demo Full 98.9 ±0.7 69.8 ±3.3 1.39 ±0.08 .041 95.8 ±2.0 58.3 ±5.0 1.89 ±0.69 .099
> Oracle –100.0 ±0.0 95.0 ±0.0 1.18 ±0.02 .000 100.0 ±0.0 95.0 ±0.0 1.17 ±0.03 .000

Metrics. For each rollout, we generate 20 oracle trajectories with the same initialization as ref-erences. We report Ctx. Acc., C-SR@95, Geom., and W1. Ctx. Acc. measures context-following accuracy using an oracle-trained folding-context classifier. C-SR@95 measures conditional fold suc-cess: a rollout must both follow the requested folding context and achieve final fold quality within the oracle-calibrated 95th-percentile success envelope. Geom. is semantic geometric completion error, computed from context-specific keypoint distances normalized by garment scale. W1 is the Wasserstein-1 distance between rollout and oracle final-state geometry distributions (Appendix D). 

Results. Table 1 shows two main trends. (1) Demonstration conditioning substantially improves fold execution quality over language conditioning. Even without pretraining, held-out context-following accuracy is similar for language and demos (75.0 vs. 73.5), but demonstrations nearly double held-out C-SR@95 (42.3 vs. 20.2) and improve geometry (Geom. 2.24 vs. 3.36; W1

0.140 vs. 0.280), indicating that demonstrations provide useful geometric structure beyond task intent alone. The fully pretrained language-conditioned policy reaches the second-best held-out Ctx. Acc., but it lags behind all demo-conditioned policies in geometry. (2) Pretraining improves both language- and demo-conditioned policies, with the largest gains on held-out folds. Pretraining on the 8-mode context subset already achieves the second-best held-out C-SR@95, Geom., and W1.Full pretraining yields the strongest overall performance, with the demo-conditioned policy reach-ing 95.8 Ctx. Acc., 58.3 C-SR@95, 1.89 Geom., and 0.099 W1 on held-out folds, suggesting that broader pretraining coverage learns a more useful representation for downstream policy learning. Table 2: Ablation results ( ∆C-SR@95 / ∆ Geom. Gain).                                       

> Variant Seen Folds Held-out Folds w/o context encoder −10 .7% /−5.6% −37 .1% /−27 .7%
> w/o proprio in context −14 .8% /−6.2% −25 .1% /+2 .3%
> w/o keypose auxiliary −8.4% /−2.1% −39 .4% /−36 .9%
> w/o 3D ALiBI −0.4% /+0 .5% −25 .4% /−15 .6%
> w/o state-event tokens −7.9% /−2.3% −28 .3% /−6.6%
> w/o summary tokens −9.8% /−3.6% −33 .7% /−13 .7%

Policy Ablations. Table 2 shows that our design choices are largely complementary, and removing any component degrades pol-icy performance. The largest held-out drops occur when removing the context encoder, keypose auxiliary and summary tokens, high-lighting the importance of structured context aggregation and explicit action-phase super-vision. Most failures arise when the policy collapses simultaneous folds into sequential ones. 4 8 12 16 

> Training fold contexts
> 30
> 40
> 50
> 60
> 70
> C-SR@95 (%)
> Seen
> Held-out

Figure 5: Scaling with context diversity. 

Scaling with Context Diversity. We vary the number of downstream training contexts while keeping the pre-trained encoder and policy recipe fixed. For the seen split, evaluation are restricted to the 4-context folds from modes 1–4. Figure 5 shows that increasing context di-versity primarily improves held-out generalization. Seen-fold C-SR@95 rises gradually from 63.6 at 4 contexts to 70.4 at 16 contexts. In contrast, held-out C-SR@95 scales more strongly, improving from 38.7 at 4 contexts to 58.3 at 8 contexts and 63.7 at 16 contexts. Notably, the 16-context setting includes four body-first folds (modes 16-719); although evaluation remains entirely on sleeve-first folds, these additional contexts still improve generalization. At 16 contexts, the upper tail of held-out performance overlaps with the lower tail of seen performance, suggesting broader context coverage yields more transferable folding behavior. Table 3: Results on the two simulators.                           

> Method FleX Isaac Lab ClothFunnels 71.0 ±5.1 73.3 ±14.8 UniFolding 82.0 ±4.4 86.7 ±10.7 UniGarment 72.7 ±5.1 83.3 ±13.8 INSTANT -F OLD 99.7 ±0.7 92.5 ±8.0

Comparison with Prior Work. For comparison with prior work, we evaluate on unseen meshes and config-urations in both FleX (in-distribution, 300 rollouts) and Isaac Lab (sim-to-sim transfer with 2 Franka robots, 120 rollouts) against primitive-based methods: Cloth-Funnels [9], which combines a keypoint detector with a folding heuristic; UniFolding [22], which predicts action points from point clouds; and UniGarmentMa-nip [12], which estimates action points from a single demonstration via visual correspondence. We evaluate on mode 1, the folding mode shared across all baselines, and adopt the hand-crafted suc-cess metric from [12]. As shown in Table 3, our method outperforms all baselines, achieving higher accuracy and lower variance despite operating directly in end-effector space as a closed-loop policy. 

4.3 Zero-Shot Sim-to-Real with Human Demonstration 

We deploy our policy zero-shot on a dual-arm robot with an overhead RGB-D camera. The model receives a single human hand demonstration for mode 1 and executes closed-loop folding on eight unseen real garments, including two shirts, two pairs of shorts, two blouses, one track jacket, and one denim jacket (Figure 11). Table 4 presents the results. Our method achieves the best performance among all baselines without requiring any real-world data collection or fine-tuning, both of which are required by UniFolding and UniGarmentManip. Additional details are provided in Appendix E.                                              

> Method #1 #2 #3 #4 #5 #6 #7 #8 Avg. ClothFunnels 3/8 1/8 2/8 0/8 0/8 0/8 0/8 0/8 9.4 UniFolding 5/8 4/8 3/8 2/8 3/8 1/8 1/8 0/8 29.7 UniGarment 2/8 4/8 2/8 2/8 2/8 1/8 3/8 1/8 26.6 INSTANT -F OLD 6/8 6/8 6/8 5/8 6/8 3/8 6/8 1/8 60.9

Table 4: Real-world results on eight unseen garments. 

Failure Modes. Common real-world failure modes by frequency are: (1) robot kinematic or Cartesian con-troller errors during policy execution and workspace limitations; (2) se-vere overhead-camera occlusions dur-ing second-stage folds, causing out-of-distribution observations; (3) sim-to-real physics discrepancies (e.g., clothes edges remaining ex-tended instead of draping downward, especially for the stiff clothes #8, or a slippery table causing clothes to slide out during folding); (4) camera calibration drift caused by unstable mounting; and (5) gripper slippery; (6) segmentation failures. Videos are available at instant-fold.github.io .

## 5 Conclusion 

We introduced Instant-Fold, an ICIL framework for DOM in which temporal contrastive pretraining learns deformation-aware visual representations under non-rigid transformations, and an in-context flow-matching policy conditioned on a single demonstration infers and executes the intended manip-ulation mode at test time. Experiments demonstrate strong performance relative to prior baselines, robust generalization to unseen garments and held-out folding modes, and zero-shot sim-to-real transfer without any real-world training data or finetuning. More broadly, our results suggest that ICIL is a promising paradigm for capturing the diversity of valid manipulation modes in DOM, and we hope Instant-Fold can serve as a foundation for broader in-context reasoning in this setting. 

Limitations. Currently, Instant-Fold has several limitations. First, it assumes reliable object seg-mentation. Second, our experiments start from states within the foldable manifold rather than from crumpled configurations. Third, we study only a single object category, namely garment tops. Fourth, our context library is manually designed and limited in scale. A promising future direc-tion is automatic context exploration, which could unleash the full potential of in-context imitation learning and broaden generalization to completely unseen deformable object manipulation tasks. 8A Data Generation 

We generate all training trajectories in the NVIDIA FleX particle simulator [48] using scripted dual-arm garment-folding programs executed on 360 long- and short-sleeved top-garment meshes from Cloth3D [49]. Each rollout records per-frame RGB-D observations (256x256), binary cloth masks, gripper states and actions in the camera frame, camera intrinsics and extrinsics, and simulator geometry in the form of indexed particle positions and visibility masks. To reduce storage, we uniformly downsample each mesh from roughly 12k–28k particles to at most 2k particles. 

Trajectory Generation. To define semantic manipulation targets, we detect cloth keypoints using a deterministic geometric heuristic on the canonical flattened mesh. After rotating each garment into a standard orientation, we identify corner keypoints as extrema of simple linear functions of particle coordinates, select bottom corners from the lowest hem band, localize one shoulder by de-tecting the strongest contour-width change and obtain the other by mirror symmetry, and define the center as the particle nearest the centroid of the two shoulders and two bottom corners. We manually inspect the detected keypoints for each mesh and discard degenerate cases. The resulting semantic keypoints are top left , top right , bottom left , bottom right , left shoulder ,

right shoulder , and center ; these keypoints can then be tracked throughout the trajectory by following their associated mesh particles. All folding trajectories are constructed as compositions of keypoint-conditioned pick-and-place subactions followed by gripper retraction. The same gener-ation pipeline is used for both representation pretraining and policy training, with the pretraining set additionally including randomized deformation trajectories for visual pretraining. Each trajectory is generated by initializing a deformable garment in simulation, applying randomized initial-state per-turbations, and executing a selected folding program from randomly sampled initial gripper states. We found the simulator physics to be most stable when scaling each mesh by a factor of two, which increases particle spacing and improves numerical robustness. To preserve a consistent visual scale, we place the camera twice as high and rescale the resulting observations by a factor of one-half. 

Context Library and Execution Variants. Our folding context library is organized as a collection of semantic folding programs. The main mode families are: sleeves-first programs, which first fold the sleeves and then fold the body; body-first programs, which reverse this order; and random-deformation programs, which apply one or two localized semantic deformations to produce diverse but non-goal-directed cloth configurations for representation pretraining. The sleeves-first family contains 15 modes formed by combining 5 sleeve subactions ( down , cross , diagonal , center , and 

asymmetric ) with 3 body subactions ( shoulders-down , bottom-up , and side-fold ). In addition, we use 4 body-first modes in our experiments: two bottom-up variants and two side-fold variants. In our main experiments, we use the 15 sleeves-first modes as folding contexts, and include these 4 body-first contexts only in pretraining and in the 16-context scaling experiments. To diversify execution while remaining compatible with dual-arm manipulation, each mode is paired with an execution variant that specifies arm ordering. For sleeve subactions, we use left-first (‘L‘), right-first (‘R‘), or simultaneous (‘S‘) execution when safe; for collision-prone sleeve motions, we restrict execution to sequential left-first or right-first variants. For modes containing a directional side fold, a second character specifies the fold direction, yielding variants such as ‘LL‘, ‘LR‘, ‘RL‘, ‘RR‘, ‘SL‘, and ‘SR‘, where the first character denotes sleeve execution order and the second de-notes side-fold direction. The low-level controller explicitly avoids gripper interference by using sequential execution and early retraction when pick or place targets would otherwise bring the two arms too close. Figure 12 summarizes these mode families with semantic keyframe visualizations, showing the initial state, an intermediate subfold state, and the final folded state, together with the language descriptions used for language-conditioned policy training and evaluation. 

Keyframe Extraction. To construct compact demonstration prompts, we extract semantic keyframes from each rollout during trajectory post-processing. We first identify candidate keyframes from gripper-state transitions, including grasp and release events, and always retain the terminal 9Table 5: Domain randomization and initial-state variation used for data generation. Unless otherwise noted, parameters are sampled independently and uniformly from the specified ranges. 

Category Parameter Value / Range Notes 

Cloth layout initialization 

Layout pose In-plane translation [−0.18 , 0.18] m Applied along each axis of table plane. Layout pose In-plane rotation [−40 ◦, 40 ◦] Randomized about the table normal. Drop initialization Cloth drop height 0.2 m Applied before rollout execution. 

Initial-state variation 

Sleeve layout Sleeve disturbance mode {N, L, R, B }1 Sampled probabilistically. Sleeve layout Mode probabilities (0 .2, 0.2, 0.2, 0.4) Probabilities for {N, L, R, B }.Sleeve layout Displacement amplitude [0 .04 , 0.08] m Applied to the disturbed sleeve con-figuration. Sleeve layout Rotation angle [−30 ◦, 30 ◦] Applied independently to each dis-turbed sleeve. Wrinkling Noise-field probability 0.5 Applied stochastically per trajectory. Wrinkling Noise-field scale [0 .9, 1.1] Spatial frequency scaling. Wrinkling Noise-field amplitude [0 .02 , 0.06] m Magnitude of wrinkle displacement. 

Appearance 

Cloth color Hue [0 .0, 1.0] Sampled uniformly in HSV space. Cloth color Saturation [0 .0, 0.8] Includes gray and white garments. Cloth color Value [0 .15 , 0.9] Includes dark garments. Lighting Brightness [0 .9, 1.1] Post-process augmentation. Lighting Contrast [0 .95 , 1.05] Post-process augmentation. 

Camera 

Camera pose Height [1 .7, 2.3] Simulation-space camera height. Camera pose Roll, pitch, yaw [−5◦, 5◦] Perturbed around a top-down pose. Camera intrinsics Field of view [35 ◦, 52 ◦]2 Sampled with a square aspect ratio. Sim-to-real scaling Target camera height 1.13 m Applied after rendering to match the real setup. 

Cloth physics 

Material parameters Stretch, bend, shear 0.45, 0.05, 0.01 Physics randomization is disabled for simulation stability.  

> 1

N: no sleeve disturbance; L: left-sleeve disturbance; R: right-sleeve disturbance; B: both-sleeve disturbance.  

> 2

The simulator supports only square aspect ratios. During real-world experiments, we center-crop the images. 

frame. We additionally preserve motion-transition frames that capture sequential coordination pat-terns, such as one gripper completing its motion before the other begins, which is important for asymmetric and return-early executions. This produces a compact keyframe sequence that preserves the semantic structure of the manipulation while discarding redundant intermediate frames. 

Domain Randomization. We apply domain randomization to reduce the sim-to-real gap along appearance, sensing, camera, and cloth-state axes. Appearance randomization samples cloth color in HSV space and applies image-space brightness and contrast augmentation. Camera randomization perturbs height, roll, pitch, yaw, and field of view around a real-world-centered operating regime. We also randomize the cloth state itself. First, the garment is spawned with a random in-plane trans-lation and rotation, then dropped from a height of 20 cm to introduce wrinkles and configuration variation. Second, sleeve disturbances probabilistically perturb the left sleeve, right sleeve, both sleeves, or neither before execution, thereby varying the initial garment layout. Third, a stochas-tic displacement field is applied with nonzero probability to create additional wrinkles and local nonrigid deformation. In contrast, cloth physics randomization is disabled for simulation stability, so differences across trajectories arise primarily from geometry, initialization, camera, appearance, and cloth-state perturbations rather than changes in simulator material parameters. Table 5 summa-rizes the full set of randomization parameters. Representative examples of randomized initial cloth configurations are shown in Figure 6. We resample if the cloth does not fit within the camera view. 10 Figure 6: Representative examples of randomized initial cloth configurations used for training, il-lustrating variation in garment shape, wrinkling, sleeve layout, camera viewpoint, and appearance. 

## B Temporal Contrastive Pretraining 

We propose a soft-weighted supervised contrastive objective [38], where each anchor token may have multiple positives induced by particle correspondence across trajectories and frames sharing the same cloth identity and weighted by a Gaussian function of token-to-particle distance. The same-cloth particle contrastive loss compares tokens within and across trajectories of the same cloth using an all-tokens denominator, and the full algorithm is given in Algorithm 1. 

Cross-cloth Contrastive Loss. To extend correspondence learning across different garment in-stances, we introduce a cross-cloth objective. Cross-cloth generalization requires learning invariant features that distinguish ”same semantic part, different cloth” from ”different semantic part, same cloth.” This objective reuses the same soft-contrastive machinery as the same-cloth loss, but replaces particle identity with sparse semantic keypoint correspondence across garments. Specifically, each semantic keypoint is encoded by nearby visual tokens, matching keypoints across cloth instances are treated as positives, and all remaining in-batch tokens serve as negatives. These semantic keypoints are also valid within the same trajectory and across trajectories of the same cloth, but they provide a much sparser supervision signal than dense particle correspondence. We therefore use a curriculum-style weighting over three levels of keypoint matching: same-trajectory, same-cloth cross-trajectory, and cross-cloth, with weights 0.3, 0.5, and 1.0, respectively. This places the strongest emphasis on cross-cloth alignment, which is the most challenging setting. As shown in our experiments, this curriculum weighting performs better than using the cross-cloth term alone. Implementation-wise, for the same-cloth contrastive loss we found that a fully batch-global denom-inator, in which each anchor is normalized against all tokens from all trajectories in the batch, was computationally impractical at the batch sizes and token resolutions used in our experiments. This formulation scales quadratically with the total number of batch tokens and requires materializing a 11 Algorithm 1 Same-Cloth Particle Contrastive Loss 

Require: A set of trajectories S sharing the same cloth identity 

Require: Token positions T(m,t ) ∈ RN ×3 and features F(m,t ) ∈ RN ×D

Require: Particle positions P(m,t ) ∈ RM ×3, visibility v(m,t ) ∈ { 0, 1}M

Require: Gaussian width σ, temperature τ

1: Assign tokens to visible particles 

2: for m ∈ S do 

3: for t ∈ { 0, . . . , T m − 1} do 

4: D(m,t ) 

> ip

← ∥ T(m,t ) 

> i

− P(m,t ) 

> p

∥

5: D(m,t ) 

> ip

← +∞ where v(m,t ) 

> p

= 0 

6: a(m,t ) 

> i

← arg min p D(m,t )

> ip

7: d(m,t ) 

> i

← ∥ T(m,t ) 

> i

− P(m,t )

> a(m,t )
> i

∥

8: end for 

9: end for 

10: Collect tokens and define shorthand 

11: I ← { (m, t, i ) | m ∈ S , t ∈ { 0, . . . , T m − 1}, i ∈ { 1, . . . , N }} 

12: For u = ( m, t, i ) ∈ I , define au ≜ a(m,t ) 

> i

, du ≜ d(m,t ) 

> i

, and zu ≜ F(m,t ) 

> i

/∥F(m,t ) 

> i

∥.

13: Build positive weights 

14: for u, v ∈ I × I do 

15: Mu,v ← 1[au = av ]

16: Wu,v ← Mu,v exp 



− d2

> u+d2
> v
> 4σ2



17: end for 

18: Wu,u ← 0 for all u ∈ I 

19: Compute soft-weighted supervised contrastive loss 

20: for u ∈ I do 

21: C(u) ← I \ { u}

22: ¯Wu,v ← Wu,v 

P 

> v′

Wu,v ′

for v ∈ C (u)

23: ℓu ← − P 

> v∈C (u)

¯Wu,v log exp( z⊤ 

> u

zv /τ )

P 

> v′∈C (u)

exp( z⊤ 

> u

zv′ /τ )

24: end for 

25: return mean  {ℓu : P 

> v

Wu,v > 0}

dense global similarity matrix over the full batch. We therefore replace the batch-global comparison set with an anchor-wise denominator restricted to tokens from trajectories sharing the same cloth identity. In contrast, for the cross-cloth contrastive loss, a global-denominator formulation remains tractable because the semantic keypoint set is much smaller than the sampled token set (7 vs 64). 

Forward-Only Contrast. We use source-to-target correspondence only because cloth folding in-duces many-to-one mappings under self-occlusion: multiple source tokens may map to the same particle region, whereas the reverse assignment is often ambiguous. Averaging forward and back-ward objectives can therefore introduce conflicting gradients and destabilize training. 

Trajectory Filtering. To reduce redundant trajectories, such as when the robot grippers move but the clothes do not, we retain only frames that exhibit sufficient cloth motion. We initialize the kept-frame set as S = {0} and then iterate over frames t = 1 , . . . , T − 1. Let tlast = max( S) denote the most recently retained frame. For each particle k, we compute its displacement relative to the last kept frame, δk = P (k) 

> t

− P (k) 

> tlast 2

. We retain frame t if the fraction of particles whose displacement exceeds a distance threshold is larger than a preset motion threshold: 1

> K

PKk=1 I(δk > τ dist ) > τ frac .

In all experiments, we use τdist = 0 .02 m and τfrac = 0 .15 . If a trajectory has more than 15 frames, we uniformly subsample it to 15 frames to keep computation tractable. 12 Table 6: Intra-trajectory correspondence tracking. Mean error in centimeters (mean ± std) and PCK (%) on the evaluation subset. KF: keyframes only; Filt: motion-filtered trajectories with a 2 cm threshold. Bold indicates best overall; underlined values indicate the best in each method family. 

METHOD DATA ERR ↓ PCK@5 ↑ PCK@2 ↑

Structured (consecutive + goal-anchored + keyframes) 

SOFT + DIST . WT . KF 5.97 ±2.5 57.7 32.6 SOFT + DIST . WT . FILT 5.53 ±2.9 57.1 32.5 SOFT FILT 14.6 ±12.1 57.1 32.2 SOFT + S YMMETRIC KF 19.0 ±11.3 59.2 33.3 

Exhaustive (all token →particle pairs) 

SOFT KF 8.15 ±4.6 50.5 29.0 SOFT FILT 6.34 ±3.2 49.2 28.6 SOFT + S YMMETRIC KF 26.2 ±11.2 53.5 31.1 HARD KF 10.5 ±6.9 53.9 31.4 HARD FILT 10.6 ±7.8 54.2 31.4 

Symmetric (outer-product weights) 

SOFT KF 7.69 ±2.4 37.8 21.6 SOFT FILT 6.85 ±1.6 33.1 20.2 

Temporal Contrast (ours) 

SOFT + DIST . WT . FILT 6.01 ±2.6 59.8 33.4 SOFT FILT 5.51 ±1.9 60.6 34.1 

HARD FILT 10.4 ±11.4 55.1 32.3 DINO V3-S+ ( FROZEN ) — 21.2 ±2.0 28.0 23.1 

Additional Ablation Experiments. 

We present additional representation-pretraining ablations to justify our design choices. For effi-ciency, these experiments use a subset of the full pretraining corpus and evaluate representation quality using mean tracking error and PCK (Percentage of Correct Keypoints). We compute these metrics with a feature-space k-NN correspondence probe: for each query token, we retrieve its near-est neighbors in the target frame by cosine similarity, predict its 3D location by similarity-weighted averaging, and compare it against the ground-truth particle position. 

Intra-Trajectory Ablation. Table 6 compares four loss families, trained with a batch size of 1 and evaluated on intra-trajectory correspondence tracking: structured pairwise contrast, exhaustive pairwise contrast, symmetric pairwise contrast, and our dense temporal contrastive objective. Struc-tured variants use selected temporal relations, including consecutive pairs, goal-anchored pairs that match each frame to future keyframes, and intermediate keyframe pairs. Exhaustive variants match all eligible frame pairs, whereas symmetric variants use bidirectional matching or symmetric outer-product weights. Our method instead applies a supervised contrastive objective over all valid tokens in the trajectory, with positives defined by shared particle assignments and each anchor normalized against all non-self tokens in the trajectory. Across these families, hard denotes binary positive assignments induced by nearest-particle correspondences, whereas soft denotes Gaussian-weighted positive assignments based on token-to-particle distance. Distance weighting further reweights pos-itive pairs by temporal separation, placing greater emphasis on longer-range correspondences. The key findings are: 1. Structured pairing outperforms exhaustive pairing. Structured variants consistently achieve lower tracking error than exhaustive variants, suggesting that targeted temporal pairs provide more informative supervision than uniformly matching all eligible frame pairs. 2. Motion filtering is most helpful for exhaustive objectives. Filtering improves exhaustive matching substantially, since low-motion frames contribute redundant or weak supervision. Structured objectives benefit less because they already emphasize informative temporal relations. 13 3. Soft targets are more stable than hard targets. Soft Gaussian weighting yields lower error and lower variance than hard assignment, indicating greater robustness to token-sampling noise, nondeterministic FPS, partial occlusion, and correspondence ambiguity in deformable clothes. 4. Symmetric losses degrade correspondence quality. Symmetric variants increase tracking er-ror substantially, suggesting that bidirectional matching introduces ambiguous supervision under self-occlusion, where a token may have multiple plausible backward matches. 5. Our dense formulation performs best. Using all valid anchor-positive pairs with dense neg-atives and soft weighting yields the strongest results, suggesting that a richer contrastive sig-nal helps the model learn features invariant to temporal position, deformation state, and cloth configuration. It also indicates that explicit distance weighting becomes unnecessary when the denominator is sufficiently dense, although optimization is more demanding. Table 7: Correspondence tracking results. Mean error (cm) with std and PCK@5cm (%) across 200 trajectories. Bold : best per column. Seen/Unseen: training vs. held-out folding modes.                                                                                

> SEEN FOLD UNSEEN FOLD
> METHOD INTRA -T RAJ CROSS -T RAJ INTRA -T RAJ CROSS -T RAJ
> ERR ↓PCK ↑ERR ↓PCK ↑ERR ↓PCK ↑ERR ↓PCK ↑
> Pairwise Contrast (single-pair denominator)
> STRUCTURED 5.88 ±7.9 58.5 7.15 ±10.2 46.5 8.41 ±10.8 37.8 9.63 ±14.6 36.5 + C ROSS -T RAJ 6.28 ±10.5 60.9 5.40 ±8.4 64.3 9.00 ±10.8 38.5 8.68 ±15.4 46.6 + C ROSS -C ONTEXT 5.76 ±8.7 62.3 5.01 ±6.4 65.0 8.72 ±9.8 38.1 8.33 ±14.9 47.7
> Temporal Contrast (our, all-frames denominator)
> SOFT + E QUAL WEIGHT 6.12 ±5.8 56.7 5.53 ±3.7 53.0 9.04 ±7.8 36.4 7.23 ±5.5 39.3 + C ROSS -T RAJ 4.99 ±3.0 60.3 4.47 ±2.5 65.0 8.11 ±6.3 37.5 6.01 ±3.9 48.2 + C ROSS -C ONTEXT 4.79 ±2.8 63.2 4.36 ±2.5 66.3 8.09 ±6.4 38.4 5.98 ±4.0 48.4
> Temporal Contrast Ablations (all with Cross-Context)
> W/ H ARD ASSIGNMENT 9.04 ±15.7 53.4 5.92 ±5.7 52.1 13.5 ±20.6 33.3 10.0 ±15.3 37.1
> W/ D ISTANCE WEIGHT 6.52 ±6.7 56.2 5.47 ±3.7 53.1 9.75 ±8.7 34.3 7.34 ±5.9 39.4

Cross-Trajectory Ablation. We increase the batch size to 4 to accommodate multiple trajectories from the same cloth identity within a batch and evaluate cross-trajectory and cross-context supervi-sion. Table 7 compares structured pairwise contrast with our dense temporal contrastive objective on both seen and unseen folding modes. Across both splits, adding cross-trajectory positives improves correspondence matching, and adding cross-context positives provides a further gain. Overall, our dense temporal formulation is consistently strongest. The Key Findings ares: 1. Dense temporal contrast performs best overall. Compared with structured pairwise contrast, the dense all-frames denominator consistently achieves lower error and higher PCK across all columns, with the largest gains on cross-trajectory matching. This suggests that exposing each anchor to a richer set of positives and harder negatives leads to more discriminative, context-invariant features, and that the same advantage extends naturally across trajectories. 2. Cross-trajectory and cross-context supervision are complementary. Adding cross-trajectory positives improves performance, and adding cross-context positives yields a further improve-ment, especially on seen folds. This suggests that cross-trajectory supervision promotes invari-ance to initialization and deformation, while cross-context supervision further improves consis-tency across different manipulation modes and cloth configurations. 3. Soft dense weighting is preferable to hard or distance-weighted variants. Hard assignment and explicit distance weighting both degrade performance, indicating that soft positives with a dense denominator provide the most effective supervision. Soft weighting is more robust to ambiguous correspondences caused by deformation, occlusion, and token-sampling noise, while explicit distance weighting appears unnecessary once the denominator is sufficiently dense. 14 Table 8: Ablation study on representation learning components. We report tracking errors (cm, 

↓) and PCK@5cm (%, ↑). Relative changes from our full model are shown in parentheses. 

Intra-Traj Cross-Traj Cross-Cloth Configuration Err ↓ PCK ↑ Err ↓ PCK ↑ Err ↓ PCK ↑

Full Model (Ours) 3.84 75.7 6.18 57.2 7.43 52.7 

w/o Multi-Layer 4.70 (+22%) 72.2 (-5%) 7.18 (+16%) 51.8 (-9%) 9.53 (+28%) 39.1 (-26%) 

w/o Curriculum Weight 3.91 (+2%) 74.3 (-2%) 6.66 (+8%) 53.8 (-6%) 7.54 (+1%) 49.5 (-6%) 

w/o Temp. Annealing 3.86 (+1%) 74.8 (-1%) 6.50 (+5%) 53.7 (-6%) 7.36 (-1%) 49.5 (-6%) 

+ H-SCL [50] 4.18 (+9%) 71.2 (-6%) 6.71 (+9%) 52.3 (-9%) 8.11 (+9%) 36.4 (-31%) 

+ FPN Neck 4.02 (+5%) 73.7 (-3%) 6.59 (+7%) 52.9 (-8%) 8.90 (+20%) 44.6 (-15%) 

Pretraining Ablations. Table 8 shows that the full model achieves the best overall balance across intra-trajectory, cross-trajectory, and cross-cloth correspondence. The largest gain comes from multi-layer DINOv3 feature aggregation, which improves all metrics and is especially important for cross-cloth matching, suggesting that semantic correspondence benefits from combining mid-level cues from blocks 3, 6, 9, and 12 rather than relying on the final layer alone. Curriculum weighting is applied to the sparse semantic keypoint contrasting objective, with same-trajectory, same-cloth cross-trajectory, and cross-cloth terms weighted by 0.3/0.5/1.0; this stabilizes optimization and helps preserve the same-cloth particle-tracking knowledge learned from the dense correspondence loss. Temperature annealing provides a smaller but still measurable stabilization effect by gradually sharpening the contrastive comparisons during training. By contrast, adding H-SCL [50] or an FPN neck does not help in our setting and often hurts per-formance, especially for cross-cloth correspondence. This suggests that our task benefits more from a clean dense contrastive objective and semantically rich multi-layer features than from additional hard-negative mining or architectural complexity. Overall, the ablation indicates that the main gains come from better feature aggregation and more balanced optimization. 

Full Pretraining Results. We report the final results from full pretraining on the 60 unseen clothes meshes used for evaluation in Table 9. After scaling to 16 contexts and 40K random-deformation trajectories, the model learns intra-trajectory and cross-cloth correspondences well, while cross-trajectory matching remains the main bottleneck. This suggests that the hardest part is learning precise correspondences across the wide range of possible deformations encountered during folding. Table 9: Final results from our full pretraining runs. We report tracking error (cm, ↓), PCK@2cm (%, ↑), and PCK@5cm (%, ↑). 

Intra-Traj Cross-Traj Cross-Cloth 

Err ↓ PCK@2 ↑ PCK@5 ↑ Err ↓ PCK@2 ↑ PCK@5 ↑ Err ↓ PCK@2 ↑ PCK@5 ↑

3.60 24.8 80.6 6.21 17.6 60.8 2.72 49.1 86.7 

Qualitative Comparison. Figures 4 and 7 show visualizations of our encoder compared with raw DINOv3 (ViT-S/16+) [2] and UniGarmentManip [12] representations on real-world folding demon-strations. Compared with raw DINOv3 features, our pretrained representation is markedly more temporally consistent: under the same PCA basis, DINOv3 often assigns different colors to the same garment regions across folding stages. This suggests that generic visual pretraining is less stable under large non-rigid cloth deformations than task-adapted representations. Compared with UniGarment’s pretrained PointNet features, our representation is also smoother and more spatially coherent, whereas UniGarment features appear more mottled and locally noisy. Overall, our repre-sentation better preserves dense cloth geometry and semantic consistency across deformations. 15 Way 1 L - Step 1 Way 1 L - Step 2 Way 1 L - Step 3 Way 1 L - Step 4 Way 2 L - Step 1 Way 2 L - Step 2 Way 2 L - Step 3 Way 2 L - Step 4 (a) DINOV3 (ViT-S/16+) [2] representations on real-world demonstrations. Way 1 L - Step 1 Way 1 L - Step 2 Way 1 L - Step 3 Way 1 L - Step 4 Way 2 L - Step 1 Way 2 L - Step 2 Way 2 L - Step 3 Way 2 L - Step 4 

(b) UniGarmentManip [12] representations on real-world demonstrations. 

Figure 7: Visualizations of DINOV3 and UniGarmentManip representations on real-world folding demonstrations. A shared PCA basis is fit to the pretrained token features and projected back onto the garment surfaces the same way as in Figure 4. 

## C In-Context Policy Learning 

Figure 8 details our in-context policy architecture, expanding on the overview in Figure 2. It consists of a context encoder that transforms context keyframes into a demonstration context, and a flow-matching action decoder that predicts bimanual keypose and trajectory actions conditioned on the context-conditioned current observation, denoising timestep, and proprioceptive state. 

Context Encoder Details. The context encoder processes both the demonstration keyframes and the current observation using shared visual and state tokenization modules. For each demonstration keyframe, a frozen pretrained cloth encoder lifts the RGB-D observation into camera-centric cloth tokens, which are projected into the policy embedding space. In parallel, each robot state is repre-sented by a learned robot-state token constructed from the 4D end-effector state (x, y, z, g ), where 

g denotes gripper openness. In our setting, each keyframe contains 64 cloth tokens and 2 robot-state tokens, one for each arm. Within each keyframe, these tokens are processed by 2 layers of per-frame spatial self-attention to model local cloth–robot interactions. Since both cloth and robot-state to-kens are grounded in 3D, we equip these spatial-attention layers with RoPE and 3D ALiBi. RoPE 16 Learned Summary Tokens 

> Cross Attention
> Demonstration Proprioception
> State Event Encoder
> State Event Tokens
> Demonstration Tokens
> Per Frame Spatial Attention
> Joint Spatial Temporal Attention
> Fused Demonstration Tokens

.… ….     

> Demonstration Context Cross Attention
> Current Tokens
> Scene Context
> Cross Attention
> Current
> Proprioception
> Tokens
> Denoising
> Step 𝒾
> MLP
> MLP
> Noisy Trajectory
> Noisy Keypose
> Linear
> Self Attention Self Attention
> MLP
> MLP
> Self Attention Self Attention
> Position Error
> Open/Close
> Horizon
> Trajectory Branch
> Keypose Branch
> FiLM

Figure 8: Detailed architecture. Top: the context encoder maps demonstration tokens into a demon-stration context by combining cloth tokens and robot-state tokens in the context keyframes through per-frame spatial attention and joint spatio-temporal attention, followed by learned summary tokens. Bottom: the flow-matching action decoder fuses the current scene with the demonstration context, concatenates the resulting scene tokens with state-event tokens from a separate branch to form the scene context, and conditions noisy action tokens on this scene context, with denoising timestep and proprioceptive conditioning injected via AdaLN, to predict keypose and trajectory actions. encodes relative 3D geometry in the attention mechanism, while 3D ALiBi adds a distance-based inductive bias that encourages attention between spatially nearby cloth and robot tokens. After per-frame spatial reasoning, the demonstration tokens are flattened across time and augmented once with temporal sinusoidal embeddings. The resulting sequence is processed by 4 layers of dense spatio-temporal self-attention, in which all tokens may attend to one another across both space and time. We adopt dense spatio-temporal attention rather than slot-wise temporal attention because the cloth tokens are obtained by FPS sampling in 3D, whose token ordering is not temporally consistent across frames, unlike fixed 2D patch grids. These dense spatio-temporal layers also use RoPE, but not 3D ALiBi. To summarize the temporally fused demonstration, we introduce 4 learned summary queries that cross-attend to the dense spatio-temporal demonstration tokens. The resulting summary tokens capture compact global mode information and are concatenated back to the token sequence, forming the final demonstration context that preserves both global intent and local geometry. 17 The current observation is encoded with the same frozen cloth encoder and robot-state tokenizer, producing current-scene tokens that consist of cloth tokens and current robot-state tokens. These tokens cross-attend to the demonstration context to become demo-conditioned scene tokens. In parallel, a separate state-event branch encodes the demonstration robot-state sequence with an MLP, adds hand-identity and temporal embeddings, and preserves gripper-state and end-effector motion information. The demo-conditioned scene tokens are concatenated with these state-event tokens to form the scene context. We find the state-event tokens to be important: without them, the model collapses all simultaneous folding modes such as mode1/S into sequential folds such as mode1/R. 

Flow-Matching Action Decoder Details. The flow-matching action decoder builds on the base flow-matching transformer architecture of [42]; we additionally condition it on the scene context and introduce a keypose branch for short-horizon subgoal supervision, which we find critical for our long-horizon folding tasks. In the dual-arm setting, the noisy action input consists of two keypose tokens and 2H trajectory tokens for horizon H, where each token carries a 3D position. Keypose and trajectory tokens are first concatenated and embedded by a shared linear action tokenizer, then augmented with hand-identity and trajectory-time embeddings. These action-query tokens cross-attend to the scene context to produce context-conditioned action tokens, which are then split into keypose and trajectory branches. Each branch is concatenated with the scene context and refined by a self-attention block, followed by a second self-attention block for prediction refinement, before being decoded by four separate MLP heads predicting keypose position, keypose gripper openness, trajectory position, and trajectory gripper openness. The denoising timestep and proprioceptive state are encoded separately and injected via AdaLN: the timestep is embedded by an MLP, while the proprioceptive state is encoded by the shared state encoder, compressed into a single conditioning vector by a second MLP, and summed with the timestep embedding to form the AdaLN modulation signal. This conditioning is applied to the action-query cross-attention and all subsequent self-attention blocks. All attention blocks here use 3D relative attention, and keypose and trajectory tokens share the same denoising timestep during both training and inference. 

Variable-Length Context Keyframes. Different folding modes may provide different numbers of context keyframes, so a batch may contain demonstrations of varying length. We pad each batch to the longest demonstration sequence and use a binary frame mask to indicate valid keyframes. This mask is expanded to token-level padding masks, ensuring attention ignores padded cloth, robot state, and state-event tokens. During decoding, the masked demonstration tokens are concatenated with the current-scene and state-event tokens, and the same mask is passed to all attention blocks, allowing variable-length demonstrations to be processed in a single batch. 

## D Simulation Experiments 

Training and Evaluation Details. For the results in Table 1 and Table 2, we train all models for 500 epochs (225k optimization steps) with the same random seed and report the last checkpoint for comparison. Training uses batch size 64. The policy uses a 384-dimensional transformer back-bone, predicts a horizon of H = 4 , conditions on a single-step proprioceptive history, and performs 10 rectified-flow denoising steps. For relative action control, the dataset converts each trajectory into per-step position deltas from the current pose and normalizes them to [−1, 1] with a calibrated workspace min–max normalizer. The auxiliary keypose branch uses a separate normalizer, also cal-ibrated on next-keyframe deltas, because keypose offsets are much larger than one-step motion. At test time, the policy is executed in a receding-horizon manner by rolling out 2 steps per query. We train with EMA and use the EMA weights for deployment and evaluation. The keypose auxiliary loss is weighted by 0.5. For each training sample, the dataset selects a random demonstration trajec-tory from the same mesh and folding mode as context conditioning. During inference, we encode the demonstration context once and cache it for reuse across subsequent policy queries. Each check-point is evaluated on 22 seen-context variants and 10 held-out-context variants across 60 held-out garments, for 1,920 rollouts in total. We fix the initialization and replay settings, including the same initialization protocol and sleeve-disturbance setup, to ensure fair comparison across methods. For 18 oracle calibration, we generate 20 demonstrations per variant and garment under the same initializa-tion protocol as the policy rollouts, yielding 38.4K oracle reference trajectories. 

Evaluation Metric Details. All four metrics are computed in the same-init setting. For each roll-out, metrics are computed against the corresponding oracle trajectory, then aggregated per garment and reported as the mean with 95% confidence intervals across garments. 

Ctx. Acc. measures whether the rollout follows the requested folding context. We extract a 19D semantic-event descriptor from the rollout’s first two grasp–release episodes and classify it with a source-matched 3-NN classifier over oracle descriptors from the same initialization family. A roll-out is counted as correct if the predicted context matches the requested context, and Ctx. Acc. is the average of this binary outcome. C-SR@95 measures joint semantic and physical success. A rollout is counted as successful only if it is first classified as the correct context and also passes the same-init oracle success envelope. This success envelope is calibrated separately for each source initialization and folding mode using oracle rollouts, and checks whether the rollout’s final fold quality remains within the oracle 95th-percentile bound. In our implementation, this fold-quality test is composite: it depends on both final fold rate and final semantic geometry. Geom. measures final semantic ge-ometric completion error. For each fold, we evaluate the mode-specific target keypoint errors at the final state, normalize each by the oracle median error for the same source initialization and folding mode, and take the worst normalized error. Thus Geom. asks how far the final folded garment is from the intended target geometry, with lower values indicating better completion. W1 measures distri-butional agreement with the oracle final geometry. For each context, we compute the Wasserstein-1 distance between the rollout and oracle distributions of the final semantic geometry coordinates, av-erage across geometry dimensions, then average across contexts: W1 = 1

> |C|

P 

> c∈C

W1(c). Unlike C-SR@95 and Geom., which evaluate each rollout individually, W1 evaluates whether the distribu-tion of outcomes produced by a method matches the oracle distribution. 

Ablation Result Details. Table 10 reports raw metrics for all ablations, showing that each major component improves held-out performance. The full model achieves the best held-out Ctx. Acc. (95.8), C-SR@95 (58.3), and W1 (0.099), and near-best Geom. (1.89). Removing 3D ALiBi leaves seen performance almost unchanged (98.9 Ctx. Acc., 69.5 C-SR@95) but substantially hurts held-out generalization (84.0 Ctx. Acc., 43.5 C-SR@95, 2.19 Geom., 0.163 W1), indicating that geomet-ric bias is especially important for mode disambiguation under generalization. The largest held-out degradation comes from removing the keypose auxiliary (35.3 C-SR@95, 2.59 Geom., 0.182 W1)or the context encoder (36.7 C-SR@95, 2.42 Geom., 0.156 W1), showing that short-horizon subgoal supervision and explicit context encoding are both crucial for robust execution. Removing summary or state-event tokens also clearly hurts performance, reducing held-out C-SR@95 to 38.7 and 41.8, respectively, consistent with summary tokens encoding the global fold plan and state-event tokens preserving sparse grasp-release timing. Finally, removing proprioception from the context encoder mainly harms context-following and conditional success (75.7 Ctx. Acc., 43.7 C-SR@95) while leaving geometric quality largely intact (1.85 Geom., 0.105 W1), suggesting that proprioceptive context matters more for choosing the correct fold than for refining final geometry. Table 10: Ablation raw metrics on 60 held-out garments over 32 folding contexts. Ctx. Acc. is context-following accuracy. C-SR@95 is conditional success: a rollout must follow the requested context and satisfy the oracle-calibrated 95th-percentile geometric success threshold. Geom. is semantic geometric completion error, and W1 is the Wasserstein-1 distance to the oracle final state.                                                                                                                                                              

> Variant Seen Folds Held-out Folds
> Ctx. Acc. ↑C-SR@95 ↑Geom. ↓W1↓Ctx. Acc. ↑C-SR@95 ↑Geom. ↓W1↓
> Full 98.9 ±0.7 69.8 ±3.3 1.39 ±0.08 .041 95.8 ±2.0 58.3 ±5.0 1.89 ±0.69 .099
> w/o context encoder 90.2 ±0.6 62.3 ±3.6 1.46 ±0.11 .045 74.7 ±1.8 36.7 ±3.8 2.42 ±1.10 .156 w/o proprio in context 89.8 ±0.7 59.5 ±3.5 1.47 ±0.10 .045 75.7 ±1.8 43.7 ±3.8 1.85 ±0.50 .105 w/o keypose auxiliary 89.8 ±0.7 63.9 ±3.5 1.42 ±0.09 .044 73.8 ±2.3 35.3 ±4.2 2.59 ±0.76 .182 w/o 3D ALiBI 98.9 ±0.6 69.5 ±3.5 1.38 ±0.08 .038 84.0 ±4.2 43.5 ±5.1 2.19 ±0.54 .163 w/o state-event tokens 90.5 ±0.4 64.2 ±3.3 1.42 ±0.10 .043 73.7 ±2.3 41.8 ±4.3 2.02 ±0.64 .125 w/o summary tokens 90.8 ±0.6 63.0 ±3.3 1.44 ±0.09 .040 71.7 ±2.3 38.7 ±4.4 2.15 ±0.64 .133

19 Per-mode Success Rates. Figure 9 shows that the best policy is nearly saturated on seen contexts, with only a small drop on S compared with the other seen modes. On held-out contexts, the main bottlenecks are concentrated in the simultaneous and order-sensitive variants: LL and SL are lowest at 88.3, followed by SR at 93.3, while the remaining unseen modes are at or above 96.7. This suggests that the remaining failure cases are driven less by coarse task recognition than by fine two-arm coordination, especially when the policy must resolve grasp timing and placement order under cluttered sleeve geometry. In contrast, the non-simultaneous variants are almost fully solved. 0 20 40 60 80 100  

> C-SR@95 (%)
> W7/LL
> W7/SL
> W7/SR
> W1/S
> W11/L
> W11/R
> W7/RL
> W7/RR
> W3/R
> W3/L
> W4/RR
> W10/R
> W10/L
> W1/R
> W7/LR
> W9/LL
> W8/R
> W8/L
> W9/LR
> W1/L
> W5/L
> W6/R
> W6/L
> W5/R
> W9/RL
> W4/RL
> W4/LR
> W4/LL
> W2/R
> W2/L
> W6/S
> W9/RR
> Best policy per-context C-SR@95
> Seen Held-out

Figure 9: Per-context same-init C-SR@95 for the best policy. Bars are sorted by perfor-mance, with seen and held-out contexts shown in paired colors. The hardest held-out cases are the simultaneous/side-fold variants, especially LL and SL , followed by SR .

## E Real-world Experiments 

Modelling Robot Occlusion. For real-world experiments, we observed severe overhead-camera occlusions, particularly during the second stage of folding. To mitigate this issue, we apply grip-per occlusions to the current observation during both pretraining and policy learning, reducing the sim-to-real mismatch without regenerating the dataset. We use a position-dependent projection tem-plate to approximate robot-induced occlusions under the top-down camera view. The demonstration keyframes remain unoccluded. This encourages the model to rely on the visible cloth geometry, rather than occluded regions, when inferring actions. 

Figure 10: Gripper occlusion modelling. Green contour: original cloth mask; white dots: gripper centers; yellow dots: newly occluded visible particles. 20 Training Details. We use the best-performing model from simulation and train with an occlusion template radius of 3 cm and a horizon of 8, as we found that longer horizons slightly improve ro-bustness to robot-induced occlusions. To encourage recovery behaviors, we follow [36] and add a 30% probability of perturbing the gripper states, followed by relabeling recovery trajectories. We additionally randomize the initial gripper positions and open/close states before each task and, with 30% probability, after first stage completion to encourage retry behaviors. 

Policy Inference. During policy inference, we use a calibrated Intel RealSense D415 camera at a resolution of 640 ×840 and adopt SAM2 [51] for real-time cloth tracking using a bounding-box prompt. The segmentation model performs reliably in most cases, with occasional failures caused by robot-induced occlusions during the second stage of folding. To match the fixed aspect ratio used in simulation, we center-crop the images to a square resolution and adjust the camera intrinsics accordingly. As part of preprocessing, we filter out points that are either too close to or too far from the camera. The dual-arm end-effector states are transformed into the camera optical frame for policy inference and converted back to each robot’s local frame for continuous execution using a Cartesian controller. The policy performs 10 denoising steps and executes the first 4 of 8 predicted actions at each iteration. We keep the end-effector orientations fixed throughout execution and linearly interpolate between actions to improve execution smoothness. 

Cross-Embodiment Transfer. Since robot grippers are excluded from the visual observations and all states and actions are expressed in the camera frame, the policy transfers across dual-arm em-bodiments without retraining. During Issac Lab simulation evaluation, we deploy the policy on two Franka robots, while in the real world we deploy it on a Dobot platform. Demonstrations can be collected directly from human hands without requiring robot teleoperation. We use the hand tracker from [52] to detect hand locations and project them back to preceding clean frames to re-cover gripper states at keyframes. Afterwards, we manually inspect and correct any incorrect or missing interaction points by clicking on cloth keypoints in the keyframes. For folding modes that involve intermediate retraction (e.g., mode 2), we compute the corresponding retraction points via interpolation. All keyframe sequences are appended with a final folded state in which both grippers are at their home positions, indicating task completion. 

Real-World Experiment Details. Figure 11 shows the garments used in our real-world experi-ments, consisting of two shirts, two pairs of shorts, two blouses, one track jacket, and one denim jacket. Our training dataset is dominated by long-sleeve garments similar to #1–2, contains a smaller proportion of garments resembling #3–4, and includes few examples similar to #5–8, making the lat-ter garments rare or out-of-distribution. We observe that simple pick-and-place actions achieve lim-ited success on garment #8 due to its high stiffness, as the fabric does not naturally drape downward without additional smoothing or dynamic manipulation. 

Figure 11: Real-world garments used in our experiments. 21 Figure 12: Visualization of all mode keyframes except final retraction frame. 22 Figure 12: Visualization of all mode keyframes except final retraction frame (continued). 23 Figure 12: Visualization of all mode keyframes except final retraction frame (continued). 24 Figure 12: Visualization of all mode keyframes except final retraction frame (continued). 25 Figure 12: Visualization of all mode keyframes except final retraction frame (continued). 26 Figure 12: Visualization of all mode keyframes except final retraction frame (continued). 27 Figure 12: Visualization of all mode keyframes except final retraction frame (continued). 28 Figure 12: Visualization of all mode keyframes except final retraction frame (continued). 29 Figure 12: Visualization of all mode keyframes except final retraction frame (continued). 30 Figure 12: Visualization of all mode keyframes except final retraction frame (continued). 31 References 

[1] T. Brown, B. Mann, N. Ryder, M. Subbiah, J. D. Kaplan, P. Dhariwal, A. Neelakantan, P. Shyam, G. Sastry, A. Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems , 33:1877–1901, 2020. [2] O. Sim´ eoni, H. V. Vo, M. Seitzer, F. Baldassarre, M. Oquab, C. Jose, V. Khalidov, M. Szafraniec, S. Yi, M. Ramamonjisoa, et al. Dinov3. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.10104 ,2025. [3] K. Zhang, B. Li, K. Hauser, and Y. Li. Adaptigraph: Material-adaptive graph-based neural dynamics for robotic manipulation. In Proceedings of Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS) ,2024. [4] S. Chen, Y. Xu, C. Yu, L. Li, X. Ma, Z. Xu, and D. Hsu. Daxbench: Benchmarking deformable object manipulation with differentiable physics. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations .[5] X. Lin, Y. Wang, J. Olkin, and D. Held. Softgym: Benchmarking deep reinforcement learning for deformable object manipulation. In Conference on Robot Learning , pages 432–448. PMLR, 2021. [6] J. Bender, M. M¨ uller, and M. Macklin. Position-based simulation methods in computer graph-ics. In Eurographics (tutorials) , pages 1–32, 2015. [7] T. Pfaff, M. Fortunato, A. Sanchez-Gonzalez, and P. Battaglia. Learning mesh-based simula-tion with graph networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations .[8] M. Macklin, M. M¨ uller, and N. Chentanez. Xpbd: position-based simulation of compliant con-strained dynamics. In Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on Motion in Games ,MIG ’16, page 49–54, New York, NY, USA, 2016. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9781450345927. doi:10.1145/2994258.2994272. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/ 2994258.2994272 .[9] A. Canberk, C. Chi, H. Ha, B. Burchfiel, E. Cousineau, S. Feng, and S. Song. Cloth funnels: Canonicalized-alignment for multi-purpose garment manipulation. In 2023 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pages 5872–5879. IEEE, 2023. [10] X. Ma, D. Hsu, and W. S. Lee. Learning latent graph dynamics for visual manipulation of deformable objects. In 2022 International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) ,pages 8266–8273. IEEE, 2022. [11] Y. Deng and D. Hsu. General-purpose clothes manipulation with semantic keypoints. In 2025 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pages 13181–13187. IEEE, 2025. [12] R. Wu, H. Lu, Y. Wang, Y. Wang, and H. Dong. Unigarmentmanip: A unified framework for category-level garment manipulation via dense visual correspondence. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 16340– 16350, June 2024. [13] T. Lips, V.-L. De Gusseme, and F. Wyffels. Learning keypoints for robotic cloth manipulation using synthetic data. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , 9(7):6528–6535, 2024. [14] M. Lippi, P. Poklukar, M. C. Welle, A. Varava, H. Yin, A. Marino, and D. Kragic. Latent space roadmap for visual action planning of deformable and rigid object manipulation. In 

2020 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) , pages 5619–5626. IEEE, 2020. 32 [15] W. Yan, A. Vangipuram, P. Abbeel, and L. Pinto. Learning predictive representations for deformable objects using contrastive estimation. In Conference on Robot Learning , pages 564–574. PMLR, 2021. [16] K. Zhang, B. Li, K. Hauser, and Y. Li. Particle-grid neural dynamics for learning deformable object models from rgb-d videos. In Proceedings of Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS) ,2025. [17] M. Song, J. Ha, B. Park, and D. Park. Implicit neural-representation learning for elastic deformable-object manipulations. In Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS) . Robotics: Science and Systems Foundation, 2025. [18] T. Tian, H. Li, B. Ai, X. Yuan, Z. Huang, and H. Su. Diffusion dynamics models with gener-ative state estimation for cloth manipulation. In Conference on Robot Learning , pages 1703– 1725. PMLR, 2025. [19] R. Shi, Z. Xue, Y. You, and C. Lu. Skeleton merger: an unsupervised aligned keypoint detector. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 43–52, 2021. [20] B. Zhou, H. Zhou, T. Liang, Q. Yu, S. Zhao, Y. Zeng, J. Lv, S. Luo, Q. Wang, X. Yu, et al. Clothesnet: An information-rich 3d garment model repository with simulated clothes environ-ment. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , pages 20428–20438, 2023. [21] H. Ha and S. Song. Flingbot: The unreasonable effectiveness of dynamic manipulation for cloth unfolding. In Conference on Robot Learning , pages 24–33. PMLR, 2022. [22] H. Xue, Y. Li, W. Xu, H. Li, D. Zheng, and C. Lu. Unifolding: Towards sample-efficient, scalable, and generalizable robotic garment folding. In Conference on Robot Learning , pages 3321–3341. PMLR, 2023. [23] N. Sunil, M. Tippur, A. S. Portillo, E. H. Adelson, and A. R. Garcia. Reactive in-air clothing manipulation with confidence-aware dense correspondence and visuotactile affordance. In 

Conference on Robot Learning , pages 93–104. PMLR, 2025. [24] N. Sunil, M. Tippur, A. S. Portillo, E. H. Adelson, and A. R. Garcia. Reactive in-air clothing manipulation with confidence-aware dense correspondence and visuotactile affordance. In 

Conference on Robot Learning , pages 93–104. PMLR, 2025. [25] T. Weng, S. M. Bajracharya, Y. Wang, K. Agrawal, and D. Held. Fabricflownet: Bimanual cloth manipulation with a flow-based policy. In Conference on Robot Learning , pages 192– 202. PMLR, 2022. [26] R. Hoque, D. Seita, A. Balakrishna, A. Ganapathi, A. Tanwani, N. Jamali, K. Yamane, S. Iba, and K. Goldberg. VisuoSpatial Foresight for Multi-Step, Multi-Task Fabric Manipulation. In 

Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS) , 2020. [27] A. Longhini, M. C. Welle, Z. Erickson, and D. Kragic. Adafold: Adapting folding trajectories of cloths via feedback-loop manipulation. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , 2024. [28] V. Vosylius and E. Johns. Few-shot in-context imitation learning via implicit graph alignment. In Conference on Robot Learning , 2023. [29] N. Di Palo and E. Johns. Dinobot: Robot manipulation via retrieval and alignment with vi-sion foundation models. In 2024 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pages 2798–2805. IEEE, 2024. [30] X. Zhang and A. Boularias. One-shot imitation learning with invariance matching for robotic manipulation. In Proceedings of Robotics: Science and Systems , Delft, Netherlands, 2024. 33 [31] Y. Wang and E. Johns. One-shot dual-arm imitation learning. 2025 IEEE International Con-ference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pages 5660–5668, 2025. [32] Y. Duan, M. Andrychowicz, B. Stadie, O. Jonathan Ho, J. Schneider, I. Sutskever, P. Abbeel, and W. Zaremba. One-shot imitation learning. Advances in neural information processing systems , 30, 2017. [33] N. Di Palo and E. Johns. Keypoint action tokens enable in-context imitation learning in robotics. In Proceedings of Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS) , 2024. [34] L. Fu, H. Huang, G. Datta, L. Y. Chen, W. C.-H. Panitch, F. Liu, H. Li, and K. Goldberg. In-context imitation learning via next-token prediction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.15980 , 2024. [35] X. Zhang, S. Liu, P. Huang, W. J. Han, Y. Lyu, M. Xu, and D. Zhao. Dynamics as prompts: In-context learning for sim-to-real system identifications. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters ,2025. [36] V. Vosylius and E. Johns. Instant policy: In-context imitation learning via graph diffusion. In 

Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2025. [37] M. M¨ uller, B. Heidelberger, M. Hennix, and J. Ratcliff. Position based dynamics. In 

Journal of Visual Communication and Image Representation , 2007. URL https://api. semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:6159986 .[38] P. Khosla, P. Teterwak, C. Wang, A. Sarna, Y. Tian, P. Isola, A. Maschinot, C. Liu, and D. Kr-ishnan. Supervised contrastive learning. Advances in neural information processing systems ,33:18661–18673, 2020. [39] E. J. Hu, Y. Shen, P. Wallis, Z. Allen-Zhu, Y. Li, S. Wang, L. Wang, and W. Chen. LoRA: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. In International Conference on Learning Rep-resentations , 2022. [40] A. Hermans, L. Beyer, and B. Leibe. In defense of the triplet loss for person re-identification. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.07737 , 2017. [41] S. James and A. J. Davison. Q-attention: Enabling efficient learning for vision-based robotic manipulation. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , 7(2):1612–1619, 2022. [42] N. Gkanatsios, J. Xu, M. Bronars, A. Mousavian, T.-W. Ke, and K. Fragkiadaki. 3d flowmatch actor: Unified 3d policy for single-and dual-arm manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.11002 , 2025. [43] Y. Wang, C. Qian, R. Fan, and E. Johns. Observer actor: Active vision imitation learning with sparse view gaussian splatting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.18140 , 2025. [44] J. Su, M. Ahmed, Y. Lu, S. Pan, W. Bo, and Y. Liu. Roformer: Enhanced transformer with rotary position embedding. Neurocomputing , 568:127063, 2024. [45] O. Press, N. Smith, and M. Lewis. Train short, test long: Attention with linear biases enables input length extrapolation. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2021. [46] W. Peebles and S. Xie. Scalable diffusion models with transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.09748 , 2022. [47] X. Liu, C. Gong, et al. Flow straight and fast: Learning to generate and transfer data with rectified flow. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations , 2022. [48] M. Macklin, M. M¨ uller, N. Chentanez, and T.-Y. Kim. Unified particle physics for real-time applications. ACM Trans. Graph. , 33(4), July 2014. ISSN 0730-0301. doi:10.1145/2601097. 2601152. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/2601097.2601152 .34 [49] H. Bertiche, M. Madadi, and S. Escalera. Cloth3d: clothed 3d humans. In European Confer-ence on Computer Vision , pages 344–359. Springer, 2020. [50] J. D. Robinson, C.-Y. Chuang, S. Sra, and S. Jegelka. Contrastive learning with hard negative samples. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2021. [51] N. Ravi, V. Gabeur, Y.-T. Hu, R. Hu, C. Ryali, T. Ma, H. Khedr, R. R¨ adle, C. Rolland, L. Gustafson, et al. Sam 2: Segment anything in images and videos. In International Confer-ence on Learning Representations , volume 2025, pages 28085–28128, 2025. [52] C. Qian, J. Urain, K. Zakka, and J. Peters. Pianomime: Learning a generalist, dexterous piano player from internet demonstrations. In Conference on Robot Learning , pages 1194–1215. PMLR, 2025. 35