Title: Distortion-Resilient Robotic Imitation Learning for Autonomous Cable Routing

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.11577v1

Published Time: Thu, 11 Jun 2026 00:25:29 GMT

Number of Pages: 12

Markdown Content:
> JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 1

# Distortion-Resilient Robotic Imitation Learning for Autonomous Cable Routing 

Hao Wang, Fu-Zhao Ou, Shiqi Wang ∗, Senior Member, IEEE, Zhaolin Wan ∗, and Xiaopeng Fan, Senior Member, IEEE 

Abstract —The rapid development of intelligent control methodologies has endowed robots with powerful autonomous intelligence. Cable routing, a ubiquitous foundational task in in-dustry, provides a rigorous benchmark for robotic dexterity and sequential decision-making. In these practical scenarios, image observation distortion frequently occurs. Samples characterized by low-quality image observations often hinder accurate model training, posing challenges to the reliability and accuracy of intelligent control systems. Nevertheless, no dedicated intelligent control solution has been proposed for scenarios of image signal distortion. Meanwhile, image quality information has not been sufficiently exploited to further enhance the performance of intelligent control methodologies. To this end, we propose anovel robotic imitation learning framework that comprises an image quality assessment module, a confidence-based learning mechanism, and a decision-making module, which is designed to maintain high performance even under distorted image observa-tions. In the proposed framework, the image quality assessment module synergizes with the confidence-based learning mecha-nism to enhance the efficacy of the decision-making module. Specifically, the image quality assessment module is incorporated to extract image quality information from image observations, while the confidence-based learning mechanism adaptively prior-itizes challenging samples to improve learning effectiveness. The decision-making module determines appropriate discrete skills or continuous actions. Experimental results demonstrate that our formulated framework enhances the overall performance of the decision-making module. 

Index Terms —intelligent control, imitation learning, image quality assessment, confidence-based learning mechanism. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

# TTH field of robotics is poised for a promising future, with significant advances paving the way for innovative applications such as in child care [1], service [2], [3], gait generation [4], manipulation [5], healthcare [6], industry [7], navigation [8]–[11], and cognition [12]. One of the primary reasons for the rapid development of robotics is that vision-based imitation learning (IL) methodologies equip robots 

Hao Wang is with the School of Artificial Intelligence, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, Heilongjiang 150001, China, and also with the Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong, Kowloon, Hong Kong SAR 999077, China (E-mail: ho.wong@my.cityu.edu.hk). Fu-Zhao Ou and Shiqi Wang are with the Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong, Kowloon, Hong Kong SAR 999077, China (E-mail: fuzhao.ou@my.cityu.edu.hk; shiqwang@cityu.edu.hk). Zhaolin Wan is with the School of Artificial Intelligence, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, Heilongjiang 150001, China (E-mail: zlwan@hit.edu.cn). Xiaopeng Fan is with the School of Artificial Intelligence, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, Heilongjiang 150001, China, also with the Pengcheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, Guangdong 518055, China, and also with the Suzhou Research Institute, Harbin Institute of Technology, Suzhou, Jiangsu 215104, China (E-mail: fxp@hit.edu.cn). 

> ∗

Corresponding Authors: Zhaolin Wan, Shiqi Wang 

with powerful autonomous intelligence capabilities [13]–[16]. IL is a specialized area within machine learning in which autonomous agents acquire the ability to interact effectively with environments by observing and mimicking human actions [17]. It typically conceptualizes behavior acquisition as a supervised learning task and achieves high computational efficiency by leveraging the extensive body of research on su-pervised learning models within the machine learning domain [18], [19]. This methodology is particularly advantageous in situations where explicit programming of the desired behavior is either difficult or impractical [20]. It drives autonomous agents to generalize from demonstrated behaviors, enabling adaptation to new and complex environments [21]. Therefore, IL approaches not only improve the efficiency and accuracy of robotic operations but also significantly broaden the scope of applications for autonomous systems. In practical robotic implementations, particularly with remote-deployed robots and fast-moving cameras, image dis-tortions commonly degrade the fidelity of visual observa-tions, thereby undermining the performance of vision-driven decision-making systems [22]–[24]. However, to date, no IL paradigm has been explicitly designed to compensate for such distortions during autonomous decision-making processes, de-spite the substantial advances in learning-from-demonstration methods for robotic control [17], [25]. Meanwhile, although extensively employed to gauge image fidelity, image quality assessment (IQA) methodologies remain unexplored within the domain of robotic intelligent control [24], [26]. Importantly, the prevailing IQA techniques are chiefly grounded in human-visual-system (HVS) modeling, and their extension to robotic perception and decision-making contexts is still in its infancy [24], [26]–[34]. These specific challenges underscore the crit-ical need for robust image processing algorithms and adaptive learning techniques to enhance the reliability and efficiency of robotic systems. Addressing these issues is essential for the seamless integration of robots into complex environments, ultimately fostering the development of more autonomous and intelligent robotic solutions. The cable routing task is a quintessential work in the field of robotics [13]. It exemplifies the difficulties found in intricate multistage robotic manipulation scenarios: managing deformable objects, integrating visual perception feedback, and executing extended sequences of actions that must all be performed correctly to accomplish the overall task [13]. The successful completion of this task will have profound implica-tions for the advancement of robotic deployment in industrial scenarios [13]. In this study, we propose a robust intelligent   

> arXiv:2606.11577v1 [cs.RO] 10 Jun 2026 JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 2Distorted Image
> Observations
> Decision -Making
> Module
> Image Quality
> Assessment
> Module
> Confidence -Based
> Mechanism
> Image Quality
> Information
> Prioritized
> Samples
> Previous Schemes
> Control
> Signal
> Proposed Framework
> Effectiveness
> ↑
> Effectiveness ↓
> Fig. 1. Comparison of the proposed robotic IL framework with previous schemes. Samples with low-quality image observations are typically chal-lenging to learn accurately in previous schemes. In our proposed framework, leveraging decision-making-related quality information extracted by the IQA module, the confidence-based learning mechanism dynamically emphasizes challenging samples during training. Based on the integration of the IQA module and the confidence-based learning mechanism, the learning process of the decision-making module is systematically guided to ensure the effective acquisition of capabilities.

control framework for the cable routing task, which improves the reliability and effectiveness of autonomous robotic systems even when image signals are interfered with. Moreover, with the intention of directly establishing a relationship between image distortions and robot visual system (RVS), we also construct the MyRMB dataset to quantify iMage quality via Robotic Manipulation Behaviors. Concurrently, we develop an objective IQA method to quantify the quality of visual observations, furnishing robotic decision-making systems with essential prior knowledge. Specifically, as depicted in Fig. 1, this proposed framework incorporates an IQA module and a confidence-based learning mechanism to improve the effectiveness of the decision-making module. The IQA module is utilized to derive decision-making-related visual quality in-formation from input observations, while the confidence-based learning mechanism dynamically prioritizes samples according to their training difficulty. Experimental results suggest that our proposed framework exhibits excellent performance in the presence of image distortion. Robotic decision-making systems achieve enhanced decision accuracy across a broad spectrum of visual fidelity conditions. Hence, our framework provides a new solution for addressing intelligent control issues in environments afflicted by image signal interference. The major contributions of this paper are as follows:  

> •

We propose a novel robotic IL framework that or-chestrates the synergy between an IQA module and a confidence-based learning mechanism to optimize the effectiveness of the decision-making component, which can achieve superior performance in scenarios with image distortions.  

> •

We first construct a dataset that assesses image quality via robotic manipulation behaviors. Furthermore, we also develop an objective IQA method to measure the quality of image observations captured by robot cameras.  

> •

Our study pioneers the sufficient exploitation of the qual-ity information extracted by the IQA methodology in the intelligent control domain, which offers a novel problem-solving perspective for the application of autonomous agents in image distortion scenarios and the development of intelligent control in autonomous systems. II. R ELATED WORKS 

In this section, we review the relevant literature in the fields of robotic intelligent control and IQA. 

A. Intelligent Control in Robotics 

Intelligent control methodologies have emerged as the predominant paradigm in robotic automation studies. Finn 

et al. [35] and Levine et al. [36] proposed learning-based methodologies for enhancing robotic interactions, with the former focusing on an unsupervised approach for predicting object motion through action-conditioned video prediction and the latter emphasizing the application of deep learning for hand-eye coordination in robotic grasping. To further address the long-horizon planning issues, hierarchical frameworks are frequently utilized. For example, Luo et al. [13] delved into the intricacies of mastering multistage tasks in robotic ma-nipulation, which underscores the significance of employing hierarchical frameworks and judiciously selecting controllers as pivotal strategies to proficiently manage setbacks and flaws caused by low-level execution. Wang et al. [37] introduced a novel robotic reinforcement learning (RL) algorithm that employs a collaborative framework between a generator net-work and a worker network to learn flexible neural skills, enabling effective decision-making in complex environments. In recent years, emerging techniques, such as large language models (LLMs) and Transformers, have also been integrated into robotic algorithms. In SayCan [38], LLMs are leveraged to empower robots to carry out textual instructions in real-world scenarios, showcasing improved performance via grounding language in affordances. Robotics Transformers [39]–[41] are a series of scalable machine learning models engineered specifically for real-world robotic control operations, leverag-ing large-scale, heterogeneous, and task-agnostic datasets to attain superior performance in specific downstream tasks. Nevertheless, existing methodologies are not optimized for distorted image observations. Furthermore, they did not con-sider using image quality information as prior knowledge to effectively enhance the performance of intelligent control methods. In contrast, our study introduces a novel framework that leverages an IQA module to obtain quality priors relevant to robotic decision-making, facilitating autonomous agents’ accurate learning from distorted visual observations in intelli-gent control tasks. 

B. Image Quality Assessment 

In the literature, most current IQA methods focus on lever-aging deep learning models to map the perceptual quality of visual content to quality scores. For instance, in MetaIQA [42], meta-learning [43] is introduced to learn the shared prior knowledge from a range of distortions, enabling quick adaptation to unseen distortion types. HyperIQA [44] adopts a self-adaptive hyper network architecture that uses a hyper network to establish image-specific perception rules and then JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 3

leverages a quality prediction network to flexibly predict image quality. Ou et al. [28] proposed a novel controllable list-wise rank learning–based IQA method, which is called CLRIQA, that synthesizes authentic distortion–based rank samples and employs a controllable list-wise ranking loss function to produce a robust prediction model. Ma et al. [45] proposed a scalable incremental learning framework (SILF) that enables sequential blind IQA across multiple evaluation tasks under limited memory constraints. In recent years, researchers have begun evaluating the quality of image observations within intelligent control scenarios. For example, the study conducted by Zhang et al. [26] introduced an embodied IQA framework for robotic intelligence, which synergistically integrates task-driven perceptual fidelity metrics with a novel embodied preference database (EPD) of 5,000 reference and distorted image annotations to uncover fundamental disparities between HVS and RVS. However, mainstream IQA methods solely aim to predict the visual quality perceived by HVS [27]–[33], [46]–[49], and the existing embodied IQA framework [26] for RVS predominantly concentrates on image observations generated within simulation environments and remains underexplored in the context of concrete intelligent control applications. In addition, the embodied IQA framework [26] is confined to single-perspective image observation, whereas in practical ap-plications, robots typically integrate image observations from multiple viewpoints to inform their decision-making processes. Therefore, to bridge these gaps, we first establish the MyRMB dataset that quantifies the quality of real-world-based multi-view image observations through robotic behaviors. Then, we develop an objective IQA method to evaluate the image qual-ity. Moreover, our proposed IQA approach is comprehensively investigated in specific robotic control applications. III. C ABLE ROUTING TASK 

Cable routing has long been regarded as a benchmark prob-lem for assessing robotic dexterity and sequential decision-making, owing to the deformable nature of the medium and the necessity for precise, multistage manipulation [13]. Achieving robust, repeatable success in this task is a critical prerequisite for the widespread deployment of robots in manufacturing and maintenance operations, where efficient and reliable cable installation under stringent spatial and tolerance constraints is paramount [13]. As configured in the study conducted by Luo et al. [13], the robot, which is controlled by a multistage controller, is required to route a cable through three individual clips by systematically executing a sequence of skills. In the high-level skill selection task, the high-level policy of the robot needs to select a discrete skill. Once a skill is selected, a corresponding low-level policy will attempt to accomplish it over the subsequent period of time. In the low-level routing task, the low-level policy needs to generate a sequence of concrete continuous actions to complete the skill. For the purpose of training such a multistage controller, they built two IL datasets that were collected via human experts. Despite attaining the expected performance on the cable routing tasks, their methodology fails to account for potential          

> (a) RF: ED=0.0000 (b) AGN: ED=1.4737
> (c) JP: ED=0.1253 (d) GB: ED=1.1525
> (e) MB: ED=0.4865 (f) MD: ED=2.4023
> Fig. 2. Examples of image observations for the high-level skill selection task in our dataset. The image observations include two wrist camera observations and a side camera observation. The reference set of image observations (RF) presented in this example is selected randomly from our dataset. The quality scores, which are Euclidean distance (ED) values, are displayed. Here, the distortion types include additive Gaussian noise (AGN), JPEG compression (JP), Gaussian blur (GB), motion blur (MB), and multiple distortion (MD).
> (a) RF: ED=0.0000 (b) AGN: ED=0.7628 (c) JP: ED=0.1474
> (d) GB: ED=0.6453 (e) MB: ED=0.1517 (f) MD: ED=0.7236
> Fig. 3. Examples of image observations for the low-level cable routing task in our dataset. Unlike the image observations for the high-level skill selection task, the low-level cable routing task only involves two wrist camera observations.

distortions in image observations under practical deployment environments. Thus, building upon their foundational datasets, we extend image observations into distorted scenarios. Addi-tionally, we propose a framework in which an IQA methodol-ogy is combined with a confidence-based learning mechanism to significantly improve decision-making precision in IL. IV. T HE MYRMB D ATASET 

In Table I, we summarize a number of well-known datasets for both robotics and IQA areas. It can be seen that there is an urgent need for a dataset enabling robotic IL in distorted environments while revealing the impact of image observation quality on RVS. To this end, the MyRMB dataset is developed. With this dataset, the quality of image observations in robotics can now be quantitatively evaluated, thereby providing afoundation for the development of our confidence-aware IL methodology. 

A. Image Collection 

Our MyRMB dataset involves two robotic control tasks, which are the high-level skill selection task and the low-level JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 4

TABLE I SUMMARY OF POPULAR DATASETS FOR ROBOTICS AND IMAGE QUALITY ASSESSMENT                                                   

> Domains Datasets Venues Amount Tasks
> Robotics Dataset released by Finn et al. [35] NeurIPS 2016 59,000 interactions Pushing Dataset released by Levine et al. [36] IJRR 2018 over 800,000 grasp attempts Grasping RoboNet [50] CoRL 2019 15 million video frames Generalizable robotic learning BridgeData V2 [51] CoRL 2023 60,096 trajectories Scalable robot learning Interactive Language [52] RA-L 2023 600,000 trajectories Building interactive, real-time, natural language-instructable robots Datasets released by Luo et al. [13] T-RO 2024 1,699 trajectories Multistage cable routing IQA MLIVE [53] ACSCC 2012 420 images Objective IQA for two types of multiply distorted images MDID2013 [54] TBC 2014 336 images IQA with multiple distortion types TID2013 [55] SPIC 2015 3,025 images Evaluation of full-reference visual quality assessment measures KADID-10k [56] QoMEX 2019 10,206 images Deep learning for IQA Degraded-Reference IQA [57] TIP 2023 32,946 images per version Development of robust machine learning based IQA models IQA for Robotics EPD [26] arXiv 2024 5,000 images Exploration of IQA in embodied artificial intelligence MyRMB (ours) –56,992 samples Cable routing in scenarios involving image distortion

cable routing task. As presented in Table II, each sample leveraged for high-level behaviors in our dataset consists of two robot wrist camera observations, a side camera ob-servation, a robot’s end-effector pose, a six-step history of executed skills, a quality score ( i.e. , the Euclidean distance value), and a ground-truth discrete skill. In comparison, only two robot wrist camera observations, a robot’s end-effector pose, a quality score, and a ground-truth continuous action are included in each sample utilized for low-level behaviors. In the MyRMB dataset, image observations captured from multiple viewpoints correspond to a single quality score, whereas in typical IQA tasks, each image is associated with an individual quality score. All camera observations are of the same size of 128 ×128 pixels. The reference samples are derived from the robotic IL datasets released by Luo et al. 

[13]. 1,192 reference sets of image observations for high-level behaviors and 1,000 reference sets for low-level behaviors are contained. As presented in Fig. 2 and Fig. 3, there are five typical distortion types included in this dataset, which are 1) additive Gaussian noise, 2) Gaussian blur, 3) motion blur, 4) JPEG compression, and 5) multiple distortion caused by all above types, and five distortion levels are introduced for each distortion type. The distortion types are designed for robotic real-world applications, simulating the distortion situations encountered by robot cameras in reality: 1) the additive Gaussian noise distortion is commonly encountered in low-light imaging conditions or in images captured by sensors with high electronic noise; 2) the Gaussian blur occurs due to defocusing or lens imperfections and is often seen in photography and videography when the camera is not properly focused; 3) the motion blur arises from the relative motion between the camera and the subject during exposure; 4) the JPEG compression distortion is frequently observed in images that have been compressed to reduce file size for storage or transmission; and 5) the multiple distortion occurs when an image is subjected to more than one type of degradation simultaneously. As a result, 29,800 distorted samples (1,192 reference samples × 5 distortion types ×

5 distortion levels) are created for the high-level decision-making policy, and 25,000 distorted samples (1,000 reference samples × 5 distortion types × 5 distortion levels) are made for the low-level. 0 1 2 3 4 5Distortion Level       

> 0.45
> 0.51
> 0.57
> 0.63
> 0.69
> 0.75 Prediction Accuracy
> AGN GB JP MB MD
> (a) Prediction Accuracy 012345Distortion Level
> 0.0
> 0.6
> 1.2
> 1.8
> 2.4
> 3.0 Euclidean Distance
> AGN GB JP MB MD (b) Euclidean Distance

Fig. 4. Statistical data of samples for the high-level skill selection task. (a) The prediction accuracy of the high-level policy model under diverse distorted conditions. (b) The Euclidean distance values between the embeddings of reference and distorted samples. 0 1 2 3 4 5Distortion Level       

> 0.625
> 0.655
> 0.685
> 0.715
> 0.745
> 0.775 MAE
> AGN GB JP MB MD
> (a) MAE 012345Distortion Level
> 0.00
> 0.35
> 0.70
> 1.05
> 1.40
> 1.75 Euclidean Distance
> AGN GB JP MB MD (b) Euclidean Distance

Fig. 5. Statistical data of samples for the low-level cable routing task. (a) The MAE values between predicted low-level actions and ground-truth values under diverse distorted conditions. (b) The Euclidean distance values between the embeddings of reference and distorted samples. 

B. Quality Score Collection 

The MyRMB dataset also eliminates the need for time-consuming and labor-intensive manual scoring, which is typ-ically required in traditional datasets, for obtaining image quality scores. In this dataset, Euclidean distance values be-tween the embeddings of reference and distorted samples are regarded as quality scores. At first, to investigate the impact of distorted image observations on decision-making tasks, the performance of the policy models proposed by Luo et al. 

[13] is evaluated in distorted scenarios. On the high-level skill selection task, we test the prediction accuracy of the high-level policy model. The prediction accuracy ξ is described as ξ = in ,where i represents the number of correct predictions, and n

denotes the total number of predictions. As depicted in Fig. 4, with the increase in the degree of distortion, the prediction accuracy of the high-level policy model under each type of distortion is essentially declining. The change in Euclidean JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 5                    

> TABLE II INFORMATION OF THE MYRMB DATASET . T HIS DATASET FACILITATES THE TRAINING OF ROBOTS TO OPERATE IN SCENARIOS WITH DISTORTIONS .MOREOVER ,IT MAKES IT POSSIBLE TO ASSESS THE QUALITY OF IMAGE OBSERVATIONS IN ROBOTICS ,THEREBY OFFERING VALUABLE IMAGE QUALITY INFORMATION THAT CAN BE UTILIZED IN OUR CONFIDENCE -AWARE IL APPROACH .
> Items Information for High-Level Skill Selection Task Information for Low-Level Routing Task
> Reference Sample Size 1,192 1,000 Distorted Sample Size 29,800 25,000 Content of Samples Wrist Camera Observations, Wrist Camera Observations, Side Camera Observations, End-Effector Poses, End-Effector Poses, Quality Scores Skill Histories, Ground-Truth Continuous Actions Quality Scores Ground-Truth Discrete Skills Distortion Types Additive Gaussian Noise, Gaussian Blur, Motion Blur, JPEG Compression, Multiple Distortion Number of Distortion Levels 5Pixel Dimension of Image Observations 128 ×128

distance values between the embeddings of reference and distorted samples is roughly inverse to the change in prediction accuracy. On the other hand, to explore the interference of visual distortion with low-level decision-making, the mean absolute error (MAE) values between predicted low-level actions and ground truth values are tested. As shown in Fig. 5, as the degree of distortion increases, the MAE values gradually increase, which is similar to the change in Euclidean distance values. Since it is revealed that the Euclidean distance values between distorted samples’ and reference samples’ embeddings can be regarded as measures to characterize the performance of robots in human-level control tasks, they are collected as quality scores via the policy models proposed by Luo et al. [13]. V. T HE PROPOSED ROBOTIC IMITATION LEARNING 

FRAMEWORK 

In the proposed framework, the integration of an IQA module with a confidence-based learning mechanism is used to improve the performance of the decision-making module under visual signal distortions. This section provides a detailed description of the proposed robotic IL framework. 

A. Framework Overview 

As depicted in Fig. 6, the proposed framework com-prises three principal components, including an IQA module, a confidence-based learning mechanism, and an decision-making module. Herein, the IQA module primarily extracts image quality information from image observations via an IQA model. The confidence-based learning mechanism uti-lizes a quality-aware confidence degree generator model to generate confidence degrees based on image quality priors, thereby directing the training of the decision-making module. The decision-making module subsequently leverages these confidence-guided samples to progressively refine the capa-bility of decision-making models. 

B. Image Quality Assessment Model 

In the context of autonomous robotic decision-making tasks, robot cameras typically capture visual observations from mul-tiple perspectives. Consequently, the multi-perspective visual observations are associated with a singular quality score. Mathematically, the IQA model can be expressed as ˆq =

fϕ(I1, I 2, ..., I n), where fϕ denotes the IQA model with net-work parameters ϕ, and Ii is the i-th image observation. In this study, the robot acquires visual observations from three distinct viewpoints in the high-level skill selection task, including two streams from wrist-mounted cameras (denoted I1 and I2) and a stream from a side camera (denoted I3). In the low-level routing task, visual observations are captured from two sepa-rate viewpoints, consisting of two wrist camera observations (denoted I1 and I2). Therefore, the whole procedure of the IQA model can be described as: 

ˆq =

(

fϕ(I1, I 2, I 3), if high-level task ,fϕ(I1, I 2), if low-level task . (1) In the IQA model, multi-view image observations are pro-cessed through the corresponding ResNet-18 networks [58] to extract image features. These features are subsequently fused and fed into fully-connected layers to derive the quality score. To optimize this IQA model such that the predicted quality score ˆq closely approximates the ground-truth value q, the regression loss LIQA is minimized: 

LIQA = || ˆq − q|| 22

=

(

|| fϕ(I1, I 2, I 3) − q|| 22, if high-level task ,

|| fϕ(I1, I 2) − q|| 22, if low-level task .

(2) 

C. Quality-Aware Confidence Degree Generator 

The quality-aware confidence degree generator is parame-terized by fully-connected layers. Its function is to map quality scores predicted by the IQA model to confidence degree values. The range of confidence degree values is (0 , 1) . Once a set of image observations is processed by the IQA model, the resulting image quality score is passed through the generator model, yielding a Gaussian distribution as the confidence JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 6Robot               

> Cameras
> …
> …
> …
> End -Effector Pose
> Skill History
> ResNet -18
> Backbone
> Image Observations
> Linear
> Projection
> ZComponent
> Six -Step
> Skill History
> Observation
> Embeddings
> Pose Embedding
> History
> Embedding
> ResNet -18
> Backbone
> Image Quality Embeddings
> ……Fully -Connected
> Layers
> ……Fully -Connected
> Layers
> ……Fully -Connected
> Layers
> Quality
> Score
> Fused Embedding
> Skill /Action
> Confidence
> Degree Value
> Common Flow
> High -Level Flow
> Exploration Flow
> Decision -Making Module Image Quality Assessment Module
> Confidence -Based
> Learning Mechanism
> Training Loss
> ℒℎ𝑖𝑔ℎ or ℒ𝑙𝑜𝑤
> Prioritize
> Fig. 6. Overview of the proposed IL framework. Common Flow denotes its presence in both the high-level skill selection task and the low-level routing task. High-Level Flow indicates that it appears exclusively in the high-level skill selection task. Exploration Flow refers to its role in further investigation for improving decision-making performance, which will be discussed in Section VI-D5.

probability distribution. Subsequently, a value sampled from this probability distribution serves as the confidence degree value that implies the challenging level of this training sample for the decision-making model. RL is leveraged to optimize the generator model. This setting is motivated by two principal considerations: 1) our investigation reveals that the performance of the decision-making model does not necessarily improve with increased image quality, which will be discussed in Section VI-D2; and 2) the set of challenging samples for a decision-making model may shift over successive training iterations. As a consequence, an RL-based optimization strategy can be an ex-cellent tool for flexibly managing challenging samples across heterogeneous image quality levels and dynamically capturing them in different training iterations. As the generator provides the confidence degree value based on the predicted quality score, the predicted quality score ˆq

and the confidence degree value c can be treated as a state and an action, respectively, in the RL formulation. Hence, the generator model g with the network parameters θ can be formulated as c ∼ gθ (c|ˆq). Combined with (1), the procedure of sampling a confidence degree value can be described as: 

c ∼ gθ (c|ˆq) = 

(

gθ (c|fϕ(I1, I 2, I 3)) , if high-level task ,gθ (c|fϕ(I1, I 2)) , if low-level task .

(3) Once the confidence degree value is sampled, a reward signal is obtained to evaluate how effectively this confidence degree reflects the relative difficulty level of the training sample for the decision-making model. When a training sample is challenging for the decision-making model to learn, the larger the confidence degree value generated by the generator model, the higher the reward value. The reward function r is defined as: 

r = −c log( p)= −c log( π(a∗|· )) , (4) where p represents the probability of executing the ground-truth action, and π(a∗|· ) denotes the probability of executing the ground-truth action a∗ under the policy function π of the decision-making model. Then, based on (4), the reward is normalized as: 

rnorm = r − μr

σr

= − c log( π(a∗|· )) + μr

σr

,

(5) where rnorm is the normalized reward, and μr and σr rep-resent the mean value and the standard deviation of rewards for the batch of samples, respectively. The generator model is trained to achieve the normalized reward as high as possible. To this end, the policy gradient theory [59], [60] is used to design the loss function LRL :

LRL = − log( gθ (c|ˆq)) · rnorm . (6) Based on this generator network, the generated confidence values prioritize training samples according to their difficulty for the decision-making network to learn, thus facilitating the training of the decision-making model. The decision-making model will put more effort into learning challenging samples. 

D. High-Level Decision-Making Model 

In this proposed framework, deep neural networks are employed for robotic decision-making, adopting the network architectures introduced by Luo et al. [13]. The network model used for decision-making on the high-level skill selection task is referred to as the high-level decision-making model. In this subsection, the high-level decision-making model will be described in detail. JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 7

The high-level decision-making model takes two wrist cam-era observations ( i.e. , I1 and I2), a side camera observation 

I3, an end-effector pose vector z, and a history of skills h

as input and outputs a selected skill ˆu at the given state. Due to the fact that the high-level policy is required to be abstract and long-term, image observations from both global and local perspectives need to be fed into the high-level decision-making model. Thus, image observations from a side perspective and two wrist perspectives are first input into the corresponding convolutional neural networks (CNNs), i.e. ,ResNet-18 networks [58] with group normalization [61], to obtain three embedding vectors, respectively. Subsequently, these embedding vectors are processed by an averaged fusion to get an observation embedding. Meanwhile, since the z

component of the end-effector pose and the skill history also play a crucial role in enhancing the decision-making performance of robots, they are passed through corresponding layers to obtain embedding vectors. Here, a fully-connected layer processes the z-coordinate to obtain a higher-dimension pose embedding vector. At the same time, the six-step skill history is input to a learned word embedding layer [62] to get a history embedding vector. The skills that may be involved in the skill history include Route , Pickup , Perturb , Go Next , and 

Empty Padding . The Route skill aims to insert the held cable into the nearest clip. The Pickup skill is employed to grasp the cable at a specific location and retain it within the gripper. The Perturb skill enables the reconfiguration of the cable into a different shape. The Go Next skill is used to route the cable into the following clip. The Empty Padding is leveraged to fill the empty slots if the current number of executed skills is less than six. Finally, the observation embedding vector, the pose embedding vector, and the history embedding vector are concatenated together and passed through fully-connected layers to get a discrete skill ˆu.The high-level skill selection task can be regarded as a four-class classification problem within the realm of su-pervised learning. Therefore, the whole procedure of the high-level decision-making model can be described as ˆu ∼

πhω (ˆ u|I1, I 2, I 3, z, h ), where πhω is the high-level policy with the network parameters ω. As it is expected that the dissimilarity between the predicted probability distribution 

πhω (u|I1, I 2, I 3, z, h ) and the ground-truth distribution is as small as possible, the loss of the high-level decision-making model Lhigh is minimized over the training set: 

Lhigh = −c log( πhω (u|I1, I 2, I 3, z, h )) , (7) where u is the ground-truth selected skill, and c denotes the quality-aware confidence degree value. By using the proposed loss function Lhigh , the decision-making model πhω is able to place greater emphasis on challenging samples during training, ultimately improving its decision-making performance. 

E. Low-Level Decision-Making Model 

The model leveraged to control the robot on the low-level cable routing task is regarded as the low-level decision-making model. In this subsection, we will explain this model in detail. The function of the low-level decision-making model is to generate concrete continuous actions based on image obser-vations and sensor values. Since the low-level action planning needs to focus on local information, the inputs to the low-level decision-making model are only two wrist camera observations (i.e. , I1 and I2) and the z component of the end-effector pose. Similar to the high-level decision-making model, the wrist camera observations are fed into corresponding ResNet-18 networks [58] with group normalization [61] to get a low-level observation embedding. The z component of the end-effector pose is input to a fully-connected layer to obtain a higher-dimension pose embedding. Next, the low-level observation embedding and the pose embedding are concatenated and passed through fully-connected layers to obtain an action probability distribution. The final continuous action is sampled from this distribution. The concrete continuous action ˆa predicted by the low-level decision-making model can be represented as ˆa ∼

πlψ (ˆ a|I1, I 2, z ), where πlψ denotes the low-level decision-making network model with the parameters ψ. To reduce the difference between the predicted action probability distribution 

πlψ (a|I1, I 2, z ) and the ground-truth distribution, the loss of the low-level decision-making model Llow is minimized: 

Llow = −c log( πlψ (a|I1, I 2, z )) , (8) where a represents the ground-truth continuous action. VI. E XPERIMENTS 

In this section, the implementation details of our proposed framework are described. We also represent the experimental results and conduct a thorough analysis. 

A. Dataset 

Our new dataset consists of 30,992 samples for robotic behaviors on the high-level skill selection task and 26,000 samples for robotic behaviors on the low-level cable routing task, which are utilized to evaluate our proposed IL frame-work. In this experiment, Euclidean distance values between the embeddings of reference and distorted samples are referred to as quality scores. All quality scores are normalized to a range of [0 , 1] . The normalized quality score q can be represented as follows: 

q = ¯qmax − ¯q

¯qmax − ¯qmin 

, (9) where ¯qmax and ¯qmin are the maximum value and the min-imum value of original quality scores, respectively, and ¯q

denotes the original value of the quality score. 

B. Evaluation Measures 

In the evaluation of decision-making models, we perceive classification accuracy as prediction accuracy to evaluate the model performance on the high-level skill selection task, while the MAE between generated low-level continuous actions and ground-truth actions is utilized to gauge the model perfor-mance on the low-level routing task. JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 8           

> TABLE III PERFORMANCE COMPARISON ON DECISION -MAKING TASKS . T HE PREDICTION ACCURACY AND THE MAE ARE EVALUATED ON THE HIGH -LEVEL SKILL SELECTION TASK AND THE LOW -LEVEL ROUTING TASK ,RESPECTIVELY .
> Methods Prediction Accuracy MAE
> Baseline [13] 0.8712 0.6733 Ours (no confidence degree generator) 0.8910 0.6741 Ours 0.8931 0.6502

For gauging the efficacy of IQA models, Pearson Linear Correlation Coefficient (PLCC), Spearman Rank-order Cor-relation Coefficient (SRCC), Kendall Rank-order Correlation Coefficient (KRCC), and Root-Mean-Squared Error (RMSE) are employed to evaluate the monotonicity and accuracy of the predictions. Both high-level and low-level samples are split according to reference images, with 60% used for training, 20% for validating, and 20% for testing. The network model trained with the best validation loss is utilized to compute the test values. 

C. Experimental Settings 

Our models are trained on a single NVIDIA L20 GPU. The dimensions of the pose embedding and the history embedding are set to 64 and 24, respectively. The fully-connected layers in the confidence degree generator model and the IQA model are all configured with a structure of (256, 256, 1), and those in the high-level and low-level decision-making models are all set to (256, 256, 4). The number of training epochs is 100. On the high-level skill selection task, the batch size and the learning rate are set to 128 and 3e-4, respectively. On the low-level routing task, the batch size and the learning rate are 256 and 1e-3, respectively. 

D. Results and Analysis 1) Overall performance on decision-making tasks: The pro-posed IL framework is trained and evaluated on the MyRMB dataset. Its performance is compared with the baseline method developed by Luo et al. [13]. To validate the role of quality-aware confidence degree values, the decision-making per-formance of utilizing quality scores directly as confidence degree values, without the incorporation of the quality-aware confidence degree generator, is evaluated. As listed in Table III, our proposed framework exhibits superior performance on both high-level and low-level tasks. With the augmentation of the quality-aware confidence degree generator, our framework achieves a prediction accuracy of nearly 0.9, which outperforms the baseline [13] by 2.5138% on the high-level skill selection task. On the low-level routing task, the improvement achieved by our framework is more pronounced. The MAE between the actions generated by our framework and the ground-truth values is approximately 0.65, which outperforms the baseline [13] by 3.4309%. When quality scores are adopted directly as confidence degree values, it exhibits a 2.2727% performance improvement compared to the baseline [13] on the high-level task, while no performance enhancement is achieved on the low-level task. On both high-level and low-level tasks, the performance of our framework with the confidence generator outweighs that without the generator. Therefore, the results suggest that the proposed quality-aware confidence degree values are more conducive to maintaining excellent performance in scenarios involving image signal distortion. 

2) Decision-making performance across different image quality ranges: The decision-making performance across dis-tinct image quality groups is presented in Fig. 7. The results demonstrate that our proposed framework leads to perfor-mance improvements across all sample groups. It has a more pronounced effect on low-quality image observation samples, such as those in poor and fair groups on both high-level and low-level tasks. It is also obvious that our framework exhibits relatively small performance differences across samples with varying image quality compared to the baseline [13]. As the image quality increases, the decision-making perfor-mance of both methods exhibits an overall upward trend be-cause richer visual features and structural information provided by higher-quality image observations enable decision-making models to better interpret complex patterns and contextual details. Nevertheless, the performance of the decision-making model does not necessarily improve with the increase in image quality. For instance, as presented in Fig. 7, the performance of the two methods on the samples with bad quality is superior to that on the samples with poor quality on the high-level task, while on the low-level task, the performance on the samples in good group outperforms that on the samples in 

excellent group. This phenomenon suggests that additional details brought by higher-quality image observations may not substantially contribute to task-specific decision-making. Rather than directly using image quality as an indicator of sample difficulty, our quality-aware confidence degree values are designed to dynamically reflect the sample difficulty based on the image quality. Therefore, it enhances the performance of the decision-making model. 

3) Overall performance evaluation on the IQA model: The effectiveness of our IQA methodology is also evaluated. We compare our IQA method with five IQA methods, which are the peak signal-to-noise ratio (PSNR), the structural similarity index measure (SSIM) [63], the learned perceptual image patch similarity (LPIPS) [64], the deep image structure and texture similarity (DISTS) [65], and CLIPIQA+ [66]. In par-ticular, the PSNR value is normalized as follows: 

qpsnr = ¯qpsnr − ¯qmin psnr 

¯qmax psnr − ¯qmin psnr 

, (10) where qpsnr is the normalized PSNR value, ¯qpsnr is the origi-nal PSNR value, as well as ¯qmax psnr and ¯qmin psnr are the maximum PSNR value and the minimum PSNR value, respectively. The normalized LPIPS value qlpips can be calculated as follows: 

qlpips = ¯qmax lpips − ¯qlpips 

¯qmax lpips − ¯qmin lpips 

, (11) where ¯qmax lpips and ¯qmin lpips denote the maximum LPIPS value and the minimum LPIPS value, respectively, as well as ¯qlpips JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 9bad poor fair good excellent Image Quality      

> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0 Prediction Accuracy
> Baseline Ours
> (a) Prediction accuracy on the high-level task bad poor fair good excellent Image Quality
> 0.0
> 0.1
> 0.2
> 0.3
> 0.4
> 0.5
> 0.6
> 0.7 Mean Absolute Error
> Baseline Ours (b) MAE on the low-level task

Fig. 7. Decision-making performance across different image quality ranges. The samples in the test set are divided into five equal-size groups based on the quality of the image observations, ranging from bad to excellent .TABLE IV OVERALL PERFORMANCE EVALUATION ON IQA VIA ROBOTIC BEHAVIORS 

Levels Methods Evaluation Measures PLCC SRCC KRCC RMSE 

High-Level PSNR 0.7469 0.8205 0.6364 0.4228 SSIM [63] 0.7529 0.8256 0.6416 0.3974 LPIPS [64] 0.7392 0.8042 0.6198 0.3668 DISTS [65] 0.7030 0.7605 0.5716 0.4500 CLIPIQA+ [66] 0.8346 0.8822 0.7069 0.1021 Ours 0.9500 0.9581 0.8293 0.0578 

Low-Level PSNR 0.7538 0.7684 0.5833 0.3958 SSIM [63] 0.7610 0.7917 0.6100 0.3676 LPIPS [64] 0.7680 0.7779 0.5935 0.3045 DISTS [65] 0.7778 0.7931 0.6054 0.3604 CLIPIQA+ [66] 0.8592 0.8702 0.6882 0.1002 Ours 0.9023 0.9167 0.7546 0.0844 

represents the original LPIPS value. The normalized DISTS value qdists can be described as follows: 

qdists = ¯qmax dists − ¯qdists 

¯qmax dists − ¯qmin dists 

, (12) in which ¯qmax dists and ¯qmin dists denote the maximum DISTS value and the minimum DISTS value, respectively, as well as ¯qdists 

is the original DISTS value. The results of PLCC, SRCC, KRCC, and RMSE are re-ported in Table IV. It can be seen that the performance of our IQA method surpasses that of other methods. Specifically, compared to the best competitor, our IQA model exhibits a 13.827% enhancement in PLCC, an 8.6035% increase in SRCC, an improvement of 17.315% in KRCC, and a reduction of 43.3888% in RMSE on the high-level skill selection task. On the low-level routing task, it outperforms the best com-petitor by 5.0163% PLCC, 5.3436% SRCC, 9.6484% KRCC, and 15.7685% RMSE. Hence, the results indicate that our IQA method can provide the quality-aware confidence degree generator with reliable image quality information. 

4) Critical regions of the image for assessing image quality: 

Since Euclidean distance values between the embeddings of reference and distorted samples are used as the image quality scores in this study, image regions that are beneficial for IQA Distorted     

> Image
> High -Level
> Gradient
> Map
> Low -Level
> Gradient
> Map
> AGN JP GB MB MD

Fig. 8. Gradient maps of several distorted images. The distortion types from left to right are additive Gaussian noise (AGN), JPEG compression (JP), Gaussian blur (GB), motion blur (MB), and multiple distortion (MD), respectively. 

methods to assess image quality can usually be regarded as key areas that influence robotic behaviors in scenarios where visual signals are distorted. It is found that the image areas on which our IQA method focuses differ between the high-level and the low-level tasks. As indicated in Fig. 8, our IQA method prefers to pay attention to clip areas on the high-level task, while it seems to focus on end-effector areas on the low-level task. This implies that the distortion occurring within the clip region of the image observation typically exerts a greater influence on robotic behaviors on the high-level skill selection task, while the distortion within the end-effector region usually has a larger impact on robotic behaviors on the low-level routing task. 

5) Exploration for further enhancing decision-making per-formance: Further enhancement of decision-making perfor-mance is explored. As illustrated in Fig. 6, in this exploration, the image quality embedding extracted by our IQA model is concatenated with other embeddings obtained from the original decision-making model and then jointly fed into the final fully-connected layers, while the other components of our methodology remain unchanged. As listed in Table V, with the incorporation of image quality embedding, our method shows a slight improvement in performance on the high-level task, with the prediction JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 10 

TABLE V PERFORMANCE COMPARISON ON DECISION -MAKING TASKS WITH /WITHOUT THE AUGMENTATION OF IMAGE QUALITY EMBEDDING .THE PREDICTION ACCURACY AND THE MAE ARE EVALUATED ON THE HIGH -LEVEL SKILL SELECTION TASK AND THE LOW -LEVEL ROUTING TASK , RESPECTIVELY .

Methods Prediction Accuracy MAE 

Without image quality embedding 0.8931 0.6502 

With image quality embedding 0.9002 0.6582 TABLE VI PERFORMANCE COMPARISON BETWEEN IMAGE -ONLY AND MULTI -MODAL 

IQA MODELS 

Levels Methods Evaluation Measures PLCC SRCC KRCC RMSE 

High-Level Image-only 0.9500 0.9581 0.8293 0.0578 Multi-modal 0.9515 0.9581 0.8290 0.0571 

Low-Level Image-only 0.9023 0.9167 0.7546 0.0844 Multi-modal 0.9054 0.9189 0.7577 0.0832 

accuracy exceeding 0.9, while a mild decline in performance is observed on the low-level task. It indicates that the quality-aware confidence degree generator in our methodology may have already conveyed key image quality-related information to the decision-making model, such that additional image quality information does not have a substantial impact on decision-making performance. 

6) Exploration for further improving IQA precision: We also explore whether additional prior information ( e.g. , the end-effector pose z and the skill history h) could further improve the precision of the IQA. In this exploration, the decision-making network structures described in Section V-D and Section V-E are adopted as IQA network models for the high-level skill selection and the low-level cable routing tasks, respectively, with the sole modification that quality score outputs replace their original skill/action outputs. Therefore, the IQA model can be formulated as follows: 

ˆq =

(

fϕ(I1, I 2, I 3, z, h ), if high-level task ,fϕ(I1, I 2, z ), if low-level task . (13) Correspondingly, based on (2), the regression loss LIQA 

becomes: 

LIQA =

(

|| fϕ(I1, I 2, I 3, z, h ) − q|| 22, if high-level task ,

|| fϕ(I1, I 2, z ) − q|| 22, if low-level task .

(14) In this way, in addition to the image observation information, the end-effector pose and the skill history can also contribute to IQA predictions. In Table VI, the performance of the image-only and multi-model IQA models is compared. In this table, the IQA model that receives only image observations as input is designated as image-only , whereas the IQA model that incorporates additional information ( e.g. , the end-effector pose z and the skill history h) is designated as multi-modal . As listed in Table VI, incorporating multi-modal inputs into IQA models can only lead to an insignificant increment in performance. The multi-modal IQA model yields improvements of 0.1579% in PLCC and 1.2111% in RMSE on the high-level skill selection task. Within the realm of the low-level routing task, it has contributed to an enhancement of 0.3436% in PLCC, 0.2400% in SRCC, 0.4108% in KRCC, and 1.4218% in RMSE. These findings suggest that while multi-modal information contributes to enhancing the predictive accuracy of IQA models, its impact remains limited, as the image data alone already enables the IQA models to achieve near-optimal performance. VII. C ONCLUSION 

Previous studies have not proposed targeted intelligent control solutions for robotic systems in scenarios involving image signal distortion, nor have they fully utilized image quality information to further enhance the performance of intelligent control methods. To this end, this study introduces a novel robotic IL framework that uses a combination of an IQA module and a confidence-based learning mechanism to enhance the reliability and effectiveness of autonomous robotic systems under conditions of image signal interference. Meanwhile, we construct the MyRMB dataset followed by an objective IQA method to quantify image quality through robotic manipulation behaviors, which provides a tool for researchers to directly assess the adverse effects of image distortions on RVS. However, while our current evaluation has already offered valuable insights into the development of intelligent control systems, we acknowledge that additional validation in diverse physical environments is important to fully demonstrate the practical viability of the proposed frame-work. Therefore, future research can extend this framework to various physical deployment scenarios, which may uncover new insights and further enhance the robustness of RVS. REFERENCES [1] X. Yang, M.-L. Shyu, H.-Q. Yu, S.-M. Sun, N.-S. Yin, and W. Chen, “Integrating image and textual information in human–robot interactions for children with autism spectrum disorder,” IEEE transactions on multimedia , vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 746–759, 2019. [2] I.-B. Jeong, W.-R. Ko, G.-M. Park, D.-H. Kim, Y.-H. Yoo, and J.-H. Kim, “Task intelligence of robots: Neural model-based mechanism of thought and online motion planning,” IEEE Transactions on Emerging Topics in Computational Intelligence , vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 41–50, 2017. [3] S. Liu, G. Tian, Y. Zhang, and P. Duan, “Scene recognition mechanism for service robot adapting various families: A cnn-based approach using multi-type cameras,” IEEE Transactions on Multimedia , vol. 24, pp. 2392–2406, 2021. [4] N. Rosa and K. M. Lynch, “A topological approach to gait generation for biped robots,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics , vol. 38, no. 2, pp. 699–718, 2022. [5] F. Sun, Y. Chen, Y. Wu, L. Li, and X. Ren, “Motion planning and cooperative manipulation for mobile robots with dual arms,” IEEE Transactions on Emerging Topics in Computational Intelligence , vol. 6, no. 6, pp. 1345–1356, 2022. [6] D. Zeng, Y. Liu, C. Qu, J. Cong, Y. Hou, and W. Lu, “Design and human-robot coupling performance analysis of flexible ankle rehabilitation robot,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 579– 586, 2024. [7] G. Campagna, M. Lagomarsino, M. Lorenzini, D. Chrysostomou, M. Rehm, and A. Ajoudani, “Promoting trust in industrial human-robot collaboration through preference-based optimization,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , 2024. JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 11 

[8] L. Chen, Y. Wang, Z. Miao, M. Feng, Z. Zhou, H. Wang, and D. Wang, “Toward safe distributed multi-robot navigation coupled with variational bayesian model,” IEEE Transactions on Automation Science and Engi-neering , vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 7583–7598, 2024. [9] H. Li, G. Hu, S. Liu, M. Ma, Y. Chen, and D. Zhao, “Neuronsgym: A hybrid framework and benchmark for robot navigation with sim2real policy learning,” IEEE Transactions on Emerging Topics in Computa-tional Intelligence , 2024. [10] Y. Hu, W. Zhou, Y. Liu, M. Zeng, W. Ding, S. Li, G. Li, Z. Li, and A. Knoll, “Efficient online planning and robust optimal control for nonholonomic mobile robot in unstructured environments,” IEEE Transactions on Emerging Topics in Computational Intelligence , 2024. [11] Q. Liu, H. Xin, Z. Liu, and H. Wang, “Toward efficient self-motion-based memory representation for visuomotor navigation of embodied robot,” IEEE Transactions on Emerging Topics in Computational Intel-ligence , 2025. [12] A. B. Gim´ enez, E. Fern´ andez-Rodicio, ´ A. Castro-Gonz´ alez, and M. A. Salichs, “Do you want to make your robot warmer? make it more reactive!” IEEE Transactions on Cognitive and Developmental Systems ,vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 1971–1980, 2023. [13] J. Luo, C. Xu, X. Geng, G. Feng, K. Fang, L. Tan, S. Schaal, and S. Levine, “Multi-stage cable routing through hierarchical imitation learning,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics , 2024. [14] D. Zhang, W. Fan, J. Lloyd, C. Yang, and N. F. Lepora, “One-shot domain-adaptive imitation learning via progressive learning applied to robotic pouring,” IEEE Transactions on Automation Science and Engineering , vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 541–554, 2024. [15] Z. Shi, X. Zhang, Y. Fang, C. Li, G. Liu, and J. Zhao, “Ranking-based generative adversarial imitation learning,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , vol. 9, no. 10, pp. 8967–8974, 2024. [16] Y. Lin, Z. Ni, and X. Zhong, “Learning from demonstrations: Acomputationally efficient inverse reinforcement learning approach with simplified implementation,” IEEE Transactions on Emerging Topics in Computational Intelligence , 2025. [17] M. Zare, P. M. Kebria, A. Khosravi, and S. Nahavandi, “A survey of imitation learning: Algorithms, recent developments, and challenges,” 

IEEE Transactions on Cybernetics , vol. 54, no. 12, pp. 7173–7186, 2024. [18] D. A. Pomerleau, “Efficient training of artificial neural networks for autonomous navigation,” Neural computation , vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 88–97, 1991. [19] S. Ross, G. Gordon, and D. Bagnell, “A reduction of imitation learning and structured prediction to no-regret online learning,” in Proceedings of the fourteenth international conference on artificial intelligence and statistics . JMLR Workshop and Conference Proceedings, 2011, pp. 627–635. [20] S. Schaal, “Is imitation learning the route to humanoid robots?” Trends in cognitive sciences , vol. 3, no. 6, pp. 233–242, 1999. [21] T. Osa, J. Pajarinen, G. Neumann, J. A. Bagnell, P. Abbeel, J. Peters 

et al. , “An algorithmic perspective on imitation learning,” Foundations and Trends® in Robotics , vol. 7, no. 1-2, pp. 1–179, 2018. [22] C. R. Steffens, L. R. V. Messias, P. J. L. Drews-Jr, and S. S. d. C. Botelho, “On robustness of robotic and autonomous systems perception: An assessment of image distortion on state-of-the-art robotic vision model,” Journal of Intelligent & Robotic Systems , vol. 101, pp. 1–17, 2021. [23] Z. Li, F. Fang, B. Zhou, W. Sun, D. Shen, and K. Liu, “A motion distortion resistant vslam system for quadruped robots based on deep learning,” in 2024 43rd Chinese Control Conference (CCC) . IEEE, 2024, pp. 4278–4283. [24] S. Ryoo, J. Jeong, and S. Han, “Image quality assessment in visual reinforcement learning for fast-moving targets,” International Journal of Control, Automation and Systems , vol. 22, no. 11, pp. 3303–3313, 2024. [25] S. Mahmoudi, A. Davar, P. Sohrabipour, R. B. Bist, Y. Tao, and D. Wang, “Leveraging imitation learning in agricultural robotics: a comprehensive survey and comparative analysis,” Frontiers in Robotics and AI , vol. 11, p. 1441312, 2024. [26] J. Zhang, C. Li, L. Yuan, G. Zheng, J. Hao, and G. Zhai, “Embod-ied image quality assessment for robotic intelligence,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.18774 , 2024. [27] Q. Jiang, W. Gao, S. Wang, G. Yue, F. Shao, Y.-S. Ho, and S. Kwong, “Blind image quality measurement by exploiting high-order statistics with deep dictionary encoding network,” IEEE Transactions on Instru-mentation and Measurement , vol. 69, no. 10, pp. 7398–7410, 2020. [28] F.-Z. Ou, Y.-G. Wang, J. Li, G. Zhu, and S. Kwong, “A novel rank learning based no-reference image quality assessment method,” IEEE Transactions on Multimedia , vol. 24, pp. 4197–4211, 2021. [29] Y. Song, Z. Zhong, B. Zhao, P. Zhang, Q. Wang, Z. Wang, L. Yao, F. Lv, and Y. Hu, “Medical ultrasound image quality assessment for autonomous robotic screening,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters ,vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 6290–6296, 2022. [30] F.-Z. Ou, B. Chen, C. Li, S. Wang, and S. Kwong, “Troubleshooting ethnic quality bias with curriculum domain adaptation for face image quality assessment,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , 2023, pp. 20 718–20 729. [31] Y. Gao, X. Min, Y. Zhu, X.-P. Zhang, and G. Zhai, “Blind image quality assessment: A fuzzy neural network for opinion score distribution prediction,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology , vol. 34, no. 3, pp. 1641–1655, 2024. [32] F.-Z. Ou, X. Chen, K. Zhao, S. Wang, Y.-G. Wang, and S. Kwong, “Refining uncertain features with self-distillation for face recognition and person re-identification,” IEEE Transactions on Multimedia , vol. 26, pp. 6981–6995, 2024. [33] F.-Z. Ou, C. Li, S. Wang, and S. Kwong, “Clib-fiqa: Face image quality assessment with confidence calibration,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition ,2024, pp. 1694–1704. [34] H. Hu, F. Shao, H. Wang, B. Mu, H. Chen, Q. Jiang, and W. Chen, “Spatio-temporal feature integration for quality assessment of stitched omnidirectional images,” IEEE Transactions on Emerging Topics in Computational Intelligence , vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 1484–1499, 2024. [35] C. Finn, I. Goodfellow, and S. Levine, “Unsupervised learning for physical interaction through video prediction,” Advances in neural information processing systems , vol. 29, 2016. [36] S. Levine, P. Pastor, A. Krizhevsky, J. Ibarz, and D. Quillen, “Learning hand-eye coordination for robotic grasping with deep learning and large-scale data collection,” The International journal of robotics research ,vol. 37, no. 4-5, pp. 421–436, 2018. [37] H. Wang, H. Man, W. Cui, R. Lu, C. Cai, and X. Fan, “Geneworker: An end-to-end robotic reinforcement learning approach with collaborative generator and worker networks,” Neural Networks , p. 106472, 2024. [38] M. Ahn, A. Brohan, N. Brown, Y. Chebotar, O. Cortes, B. David, C. Finn, C. Fu, K. Gopalakrishnan, K. Hausman et al. , “Do as i can, not as i say: Grounding language in robotic affordances,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.01691 , 2022. [39] A. Brohan, N. Brown, J. Carbajal, Y. Chebotar, J. Dabis, C. Finn, K. Gopalakrishnan, K. Hausman, A. Herzog, J. Hsu et al. , “Rt-1: Robotics transformer for real-world control at scale,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.06817 , 2022. [40] A. Brohan, N. Brown, J. Carbajal, Y. Chebotar, X. Chen, K. Choroman-ski, T. Ding, D. Driess, A. Dubey, C. Finn et al. , “Rt-2: Vision-language-action models transfer web knowledge to robotic control,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.15818 , 2023. [41] A. Padalkar, A. Pooley, A. Jain, A. Bewley, A. Herzog, A. Ir-pan, A. Khazatsky, A. Rai, A. Singh, A. Brohan et al. , “Open x-embodiment: Robotic learning datasets and rt-x models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.08864 , 2023. [42] H. Zhu, L. Li, J. Wu, W. Dong, and G. Shi, “Metaiqa: Deep meta-learning for no-reference image quality assessment,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition ,2020, pp. 14 143–14 152. [43] J. Vanschoren, “Meta-learning: A survey,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.03548 , 2018. [44] S. Su, Q. Yan, Y. Zhu, C. Zhang, X. Ge, J. Sun, and Y. Zhang, “Blindly assess image quality in the wild guided by a self-adaptive hyper network,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2020, pp. 3667–3676. [45] R. Ma, Q. Wu, K. N. Ngan, H. Li, F. Meng, and L. Xu, “Forgetting to remember: A scalable incremental learning framework for cross-task blind image quality assessment,” IEEE Transactions on Multimedia ,vol. 25, pp. 8817–8827, 2023. [46] L. Shen, R. Fang, Y. Yao, X. Geng, and D. Wu, “No-reference stereoscopic image quality assessment based on image distortion and stereo perceptual information,” IEEE Transactions on Emerging Topics in Computational Intelligence , vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 59–72, 2019. [47] C. Tian, X. Chai, G. Chen, F. Shao, Q. Jiang, X. Meng, L. Xu, and Y.-S. Ho, “Vsoiqe: A novel viewport-based stitched 360° omnidirectional image quality evaluator,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology , vol. 32, no. 10, pp. 6557–6572, 2022. [48] Y. Zhu, Y. Li, W. Sun, X. Min, G. Zhai, and X. Yang, “Blind image quality assessment via cross-view consistency,” IEEE Transactions on Multimedia , vol. 25, pp. 7607–7620, 2023. JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 12 

[49] G. Yue, H. Wu, Q. Jiang, T. Zhou, W. Yan, and T. Wang, “Perceptual quality assessment of retouched face images,” IEEE Transactions on Multimedia , vol. 26, pp. 5741–5752, 2024. [50] S. Dasari, F. Ebert, S. Tian, S. Nair, B. Bucher, K. Schmeckpeper, S. Singh, S. Levine, and C. Finn, “Robonet: Large-scale multi-robot learning,” in Conference on Robot Learning . PMLR, 2020, pp. 885– 897. [51] H. R. Walke, K. Black, T. Z. Zhao, Q. Vuong, C. Zheng, P. Hansen-Estruch, A. W. He, V. Myers, M. J. Kim, M. Du et al. , “Bridgedata v2: A dataset for robot learning at scale,” in Conference on Robot Learning .PMLR, 2023, pp. 1723–1736. [52] C. Lynch, A. Wahid, J. Tompson, T. Ding, J. Betker, R. Baruch, T. Armstrong, and P. Florence, “Interactive language: Talking to robots in real time,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , 2023. [53] D. Jayaraman, A. Mittal, A. K. Moorthy, and A. C. Bovik, “Objective quality assessment of multiply distorted images,” in 2012 Conference record of the forty sixth asilomar conference on signals, systems and computers (ASILOMAR) . IEEE, 2012, pp. 1693–1697. [54] K. Gu, G. Zhai, X. Yang, and W. Zhang, “Hybrid no-reference quality metric for singly and multiply distorted images,” IEEE Transactions on Broadcasting , vol. 60, no. 3, pp. 555–567, 2014. [55] N. Ponomarenko, L. Jin, O. Ieremeiev, V. Lukin, K. Egiazarian, J. Astola, B. Vozel, K. Chehdi, M. Carli, F. Battisti et al. , “Image database tid2013: Peculiarities, results and perspectives,” Signal processing: Image com-munication , vol. 30, pp. 57–77, 2015. [56] H. Lin, V. Hosu, and D. Saupe, “Kadid-10k: A large-scale artificially distorted iqa database,” in 2019 Eleventh International Conference on Quality of Multimedia Experience (QoMEX) . IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–3. [57] S. Athar and Z. Wang, “Degraded reference image quality assessment,” 

IEEE Transactions on Image Processing , vol. 32, pp. 822–837, 2023. [58] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for image recognition,” in Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , 2016, pp. 770–778. [59] R. J. Williams, “Simple statistical gradient-following algorithms for connectionist reinforcement learning,” Machine learning , vol. 8, pp. 229–256, 1992. [60] R. S. Sutton, D. McAllester, S. Singh, and Y. Mansour, “Policy gradient methods for reinforcement learning with function approximation,” in 

Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , 1999, pp. 1057–1063. [61] Y. Wu and K. He, “Group normalization,” in Proceedings of the European conference on computer vision (ECCV) , 2018, pp. 3–19. [62] T. Mikolov, I. Sutskever, K. Chen, G. S. Corrado, and J. Dean, “Distributed representations of words and phrases and their composi-tionality,” Advances in neural information processing systems , vol. 26, 2013. [63] Z. Wang, “Image quality assessment: from error visibility to structural similarity,” IEEE transactions on image processing , vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 600–612, 2004. [64] R. Zhang, P. Isola, A. A. Efros, E. Shechtman, and O. Wang, “The unreasonable effectiveness of deep features as a perceptual metric,” in 

Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , 2018, pp. 586–595. [65] K. Ding, K. Ma, S. Wang, and E. P. Simoncelli, “Image quality assessment: Unifying structure and texture similarity,” IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence , vol. 44, no. 5, pp. 2567– 2581, 2020. [66] J. Wang, K. C. Chan, and C. C. Loy, “Exploring clip for assessing the look and feel of images,” in Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , vol. 37, no. 2, 2023, pp. 2555–2563.