Title: Fourier Features Let Agents Learn High Precision Policies with Imitation Learning

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.12334v1

Published Time: Thu, 11 Jun 2026 01:28:51 GMT

Number of Pages: 24

Markdown Content:
# Fourier Features Let Agents Learn High Precision Policies with Imitation Learning 

Bal´ azs Gyenes 1 2 Emiliyan Gospodinov 1 Jan Frieling 1 Enrico Krohmer 1 Nicolas Schreiber 1 Xiaogang Jia 1

Niklas Freymuth 1 Gerhard Neumann 1

## Abstract 

High-precision robotic manipulation requires fine-grained spatial reasoning that is often difficult to achieve with RGB-only policies due to depth am-biguity and perspective scale issues. Policies that leverage 3D information directly, such as those based on point clouds, offer a stronger geomet-ric prior over purely image-based ones, yet their performance remains highly task-dependent. We hypothesize that this discrepancy may be due to the spectral bias of neural networks towards learning low frequency functions, which espe-cially affects architectures conditioned on slow-moving Cartesian features. We thus propose to map point clouds from Cartesian space into high-dimensional Fourier space, effectively equipping the point cloud encoder with direct access to high-frequency features. We experimentally validate the use of Fourier features on challenging manip-ulation tasks from the RoboCasa and ManiSkill3 benchmarks and on a real robot setup. Despite their simplicity, we find that Fourier features pro-vide significant benefits across diverse encoder ar-chitectures and benchmarks and are robust across hyperparameters. Our results indicate that Fourier features let policies leverage geometric details more effectively than Cartesian features, show-ing their potential as a general-purpose tool for point cloud-based imitation learning. We pro-vide source code and videos on our project page: https://fourier-il.github.io/fourier-il. 

> 1

Autonomous Learning Robots, Karlsruhe Institute of Technol-ogy, Germany 2HIDSS4Health - Helmholtz Information and Data Science School for Health, Karlsruhe/Heidelberg, Germany. Cor-respondence to: Bal ´azs Gyenes <balazs@gyenes.ca >, Gerhard Neumann <gerhard.neumann@kit.edu >.

Proceedings of the 43 rd International Conference on Machine Learning , Seoul, South Korea. PMLR 306, 2026. Copyright 2026 by the author(s). 

## 1. Introduction 

Diffusion-based Imitation Learning (IL) has emerged as a powerful framework for robotic visuomotor control (Chi et al., 2023; Reuss et al., 2023; Wu et al., 2025; Intelligence et al., 2025). By treating action generation as a denoising process (Ho et al., 2020), diffusion policies naturally capture the multi-modal action distributions of human expert demon-strations. This capability has made diffusion policies the state-of-the-art on long-horizon and multi-task manipulation benchmarks. Yet, the success of diffusion policies depends on the observation encoder’s ability to extract subtle posi-tional cues from the observed scene that inform the policy’s next action. Policies that cannot respond to the geometric information hidden in observations are unable to imitate expert demonstrations that condition on this information. RGB images remain the most common type of observation due to their semantic richness and the widespread avail-ability of pretrained vision encoders. However, because they lack an explicit representation of 3D geometry, they require the policy to implicitly infer a 2D-to-3D mapping and are also sensitive to viewpoint and image artifacts, such as lighting variations (Ke et al., 2025; Wilcox et al., 2025; Donat et al., 2025). In contrast, 3D modalities such as depth maps, point clouds, and point maps directly represent shape, distance, and spatial relationships, helping the policy rea-son about geometry and occlusions and execute complex motions accurately. While this explicit structuring provides a strong geometric prior, the success of policies that rely purely on 3D modalities varies greatly between tasks. As a result, a number of hybrid 2D/3D architectures have been proposed (Ke et al., 2025; Wilcox et al., 2025; Goyal et al., 2023), which often use foundation models to extract fea-tures from the 2D RGB stream and combine this with 3D information in a variety of ways. In this paper, we argue that the key shortcoming of current 3D modalities lies in the spectral bias of the architectures that are used to process them. For high-precision tasks, such as inserting a peg into a socket, the policy needs to learn a sharp decision boundary for e.g. whether to insert the peg or reposition it. Since the observations that should result in these respective actions differ only slightly, a high 1  

> arXiv:2606.12334v1 [cs.LG] 10 Jun 2026 Fourier Features for Point Cloud Imitation Learning Unprojection
> Increasing Frequency Increasing Frequency
> Figure 1. Method Overview. Adding a Fourier feature mapping from Cartesian coordinates into a higher-dimensional feature space improves performance for any point cloud encoder used for diffu-sion imitation learning. For high-precision policies, the network must learn to condition on fine details in the scene geometry e.g. to decide whether to insert the leg into the slot or reposition it, yet neural networks learn the high frequency components of the target function only slowly, if at all. While neighbouring points in the scene have very similar Cartesian features, the high-dimensional Fourier features allow them to easily be distinguished.

frequency function is best suited to represent this desired policy faithfully. Although neural networks are universal function approximators (Hornik et al., 1989), Multi-Layer Perceptrons (MLPs) and fully-connected layers have a spec-tral bias towards learning low-frequency components first, while high-frequency components converge slowly or may not be learned at all (Rahaman et al., 2019; Tancik et al., 2020). Although this phenomenon is well-known, these MLPs underpin the majority of point cloud architectures, which use them to encode Cartesian coordinates into latent features. In contrast, the convolutional layers underpinning most image-based architectures are inherently more biased towards high-frequency signals, with evidence that they may be lacking sensitivity to lower frequencies (Abello et al., 2021; Jo & Bengio, 2017; Wang et al., 2020). In fields such as novel view synthesis, the spectral bias of MLPs is remedied using a Fourier feature mapping of the input coordinates (Mildenhall et al., 2021; Tancik et al., 2020). However, recent foundation models for robotic con-trol from point clouds (Chen et al., 2024; Zhou et al., 2024; Jia et al., 2025b; Li et al., 2026) do not leverage this in-sight, and its use within IL architectures has so far been limited to isolated cases (Wilcox et al., 2025). This work therefore systematically evaluates Fourier feature mappings and their use for diffusion-based IL on point clouds across a broad range of policy architectures. By projecting points into a higher dimensional space where subtle geometric dif-ferences are amplified, we counteract spectral bias. Experi-mentally, we show that using Fourier-encoded input repre-sentations leads to consistent improvements across different point cloud architectures and benchmarks. These input rep-resentations improve success rate by up to 20% and 7% on RoboCasa (Nasiriany et al., 2024) and ManiSkill3 (Tao et al., 2025), respectively. Further, they improve normalized score on 4 challenging real world tasks from 14 .8% to 40 .2% .Qualitatively, policies trained with Fourier mappings exhibit smoother and more precise motions, particularly on robotic control tasks where fine-grained manipulation matters. Our contributions are as follows: 1) we incorporating Fourier feature mappings into various point cloud encoders and show how this resolves their spectral bias; 2) through experiments on a real robot and on the RoboCasa and Mani-Skill task suites, we demonstrate consistent and robust im-provements over baselines without Fourier feature map-pings; and 3) through extensive analysis and parameter stud-ies, we provide a number of insights. Fourier features are most beneficial when point clouds contain rich geometric detail, but provide a boost even in the absence of fine geom-etry, perhaps by improving learning dynamics. Furthermore, Fourier features do not require additional regularization and are robust to choice of hyperparameters. 

## 2. Related Work 

Imitation Learning in Robotics. Recent progress in IL has been driven by incorporating diffusion (Chi et al., 2023; Reuss et al., 2023) and flow matching (Lipman et al., 2023) objectives, which enable policies to learn multi-modal ac-tion distributions, and by training policies on large-scale datasets (Black et al., 2024; Intelligence et al., 2025; Brohan et al., 2022; Zitkovich et al., 2023; Zhu et al., 2025) to signif-icantly increase generalization and performance. However, these approaches are primarily conditioned on RGB images. This choice allows leveraging powerful pretrained visual encoders and provides strong semantic features, but lacks explicit representation of 3D geometry, causing issues with depth and scale ambiguity. Similarly, image-based represen-tations are sensitive to viewpoint and lighting variations (Ze et al., 2024; Zhu et al., 2024; Wilcox et al., 2025). 

3D Visual Representations for Imitation Learning. To address these shortcomings, 3D information can be lever-aged in stand-alone modalities, such as point clouds or point maps, or in combination with RGB. On a number of challenging tasks, lightweight point cloud-based policies outperform RGB and RGB-D modalities while requiring significantly less data (Ze et al., 2024; Zhu et al., 2024; Ze et al., 2025). Point maps (Wang et al., 2024), an alternative to point clouds defined on a grid-like structure, have been proposed for IL (Jia et al., 2025a), but their performance can be inconsistent (Zhu et al., 2024). In contrast, a vari-ety of hybrid 2D/3D approaches augment 2D features from pre-trained image encoders with 3D position information reconstructed from the original depth maps, either at the patch level (Ke et al., 2025), the point level (Wilcox et al., 2025), or in voxels (Gervet et al., 2023). This combines the benefits of large-scale image datasets with those of ex-plicit geometric representations, emphasizing the benefits of complex architectural design. We argue that the recent pop-ularity of such approaches is ultimately due to the spectral frequency bias of most point cloud encoders, which prevents 2Fourier Features for Point Cloud Imitation Learning 

them from accurately learning high-precision tasks when employed in isolation. We show that simple architectures become significantly more effective when equipped with non-parametric Fourier input mappings. 

Deep Learning on Point Clouds Since the advent of Point-Net (Qi et al., 2017a), many architectures have been pro-posed for processing unordered sets of points (Qi et al., 2017b; Zhao et al., 2021; Lai et al., 2022; Qian et al., 2022). A common paradigm inspired by vision transformers is to group the point clouds into patches which are then tok-enized using a lightweight PointNet-style network (Pang et al., 2022; Yu et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2023). Patches are computed by taking the K-Nearest Neighors (KNN) around each patch center point, which are sampled randomly using Farthest Point Sampling (FPS). To reduce the dimension-ality of the embedding, the patch tokens can optionally be aggregated using max pooling (Zhu et al., 2024) or atten-tion (Gyenes et al., 2024). The flexibility of this paradigm has allowed it to be used to train multi-modal foundation models on point clouds (Chen et al., 2024; Zhou et al., 2024; Jia et al., 2025b; Li et al., 2026), but these models all operate on slow-changing Cartesian features. Because of the ubiq-uity of PointPatch architectures in the literature, we focus our experiments on several of its variants. 

Deep Learning with Fourier Features. Neural networks have a spectral bias, i.e., a tendency to learn low-frequency components faster than high-frequency ones (Rahaman et al., 2019). As confirmed in more recent empirical work (Lippe et al., 2023; W ¨urth et al., 2026), this is partly a characteristic of the mean-squared error (MSE) loss, which tends to focus on low-frequency signals in the data. Fourier features (Mildenhall et al., 2021; Tancik et al., 2020) miti-gate this issue by projecting low-dimensional Cartesian co-ordinates into high-dimensional sinusoidal embeddings with multiple frequencies. This technique was key for enabling Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs) to learn detailed 3D scenes with high fidelity and avoid blurry, oversmoothed reconstruc-tions (Mildenhall et al., 2021; Tancik et al., 2020; Barron et al., 2022). The frequencies can be fixed or learned end-to-end (Gao et al., 2023; Sun et al., 2024). Adapt3R (Wilcox et al., 2025) leverages Fourier features to outperform other architectures on unseen viewpoints during inference, but they do not investigate their effect in other contexts. In contrast, we apply Fourier mappings systematically across point cloud architectures in diffusion-based IL, comparing them from a frequency-domain perspective. 

## 3. Method 

3.1. Problem Formulation 

IL aims to learn a policy from expert demonstra-tions. We are given a dataset of N expert trajectories Fourier Features         

> Tokenizer Action Decoder
> Figure 2. Overview of PointPatch encoder family. We group the input point cloud into neighborhoods N(i)(patch centers indicated in blue on the left). We map point coordinates into Fourier feature space to amplify subtle geometric differences between similar observations. The tokenizer extracts and aggregates features for each neighborhood to produce a set of tokens which are then forwarded to a goal-conditioned diffusion policy Dθto denoise the next action chunk.

τi = ( gi, (o1, a 1), (o2, a 2), . . . , (oℓi , a ℓi )) , where ℓi is the trajectory length and gi is the language description for the trajectory. We aim to learn a policy π(a|o, g) that maps observations o and embedded goal g to actions a. Pre-dicting sequences of actions, i.e. action chunking, where 

a = ( ak, a k+1 , . . . , a k+H ) with current time step k and horizon H, results in more temporally correlated trajecto-ries than predicting individual actions (Zhao et al., 2023). Each observation o contains depth images from M cameras. In combination with the camera intrinsic and extrinsic pa-rameters from calibration, we can construct any desired 3D observation representation from these depth images. 

3.2. Score-Based Diffusion 

To learn policies from expert demonstrations, we use the typ-ical Elucidated Diffusion Models (EDM) framework (Kar-ras et al., 2022; Reuss et al., 2023) for score-based action diffusion conditioned on scene observations. Diffusion mod-els learn to generate new samples by iteratively reversing a Gaussian perturbation process. Under this framework, the policy πθ (a|o) successively denoises actions generated from Gaussian noise back to the data manifold. The noising and its inverse process can be expressed with the following Stochastic Differential Equation (SDE) 

da± =  ±βtσt − ˙σt

σt∇a log pt(a|o, g)dt +p2βtσtdω t,

(1) where da+ and da− describe the forward and reverse pro-cess, respectively, βt determines the noise injection rate at diffusion time step t, dω t represents infinitesimal Gaussian noise, and ∇a log pt(a|o, g) denotes the score function of the diffusion process. To learn that score function, we train a neural network Dθ (a + ϵ, o, g, σ t) via score matching (Vin-cent, 2011): 

LSM = Eσ, a,ϵ

α(σt)|Dθ (a + ϵ, o, g, σ t) − a|22

. (2) 3Fourier Features for Point Cloud Imitation Learning 

RoboCasa   

> CoffeeServeMug CoffeePressButton
> TurnOnStove CloseDrawer

ManiSkill3   

> PokeCube-v1 PullCube-v1
> PushCube-v1 RollBall-v1

Real World   

> Drawer Cup-Stacking
> Arranging Folding

Figure 3. Overview of all evalution tasks from RoboCasa, ManiSkill3, and Real World benchmarks. Left : 4 of 16 RoboCasa tasks used for evaluation. Middle : all evaluated ManiSkill3 tasks. Right : starting configurations for all real-world tasks. 

During policy sampling, i.e. during the reverse process, action samples are guided towards high-density regions of the data distribution by following the score function 

∇a log pt(a|o, g). Therefore we can generate new action sequences beginning with Gaussian noise by iteratively de-noising the action sequence with a numerical probability flow Ordinary Differential Equation (ODE) solver. We uti-lize the DDIM-solver to enable efficient action denoising in few steps (Song et al., 2021). 

3.3. Point Clouds 

Given a set of depth images from M cameras 

D(0) , . . . , D (M ) ∈ RW ×H as well as the camera intrinsics 

K(0) , . . . , K (M ) ∈ R3×3, we first construct point clouds 

X(j) ∈ RW H ×3 in each camera’s local coordinate frame via unprojection, i.e., 

X(m)  

> iW +j

= D(m) 

> i,j

· (K(m))−1 (i, j, 1) T . (3) By multiplying each point cloud with its corresponding extrinsic matrix, we can transform it from the camera coor-dinate frame to the world frame. The final point cloud X is obtained by concatenating point clouds from all M views. We treat point clouds as graphs, where the coordinates XYZ are the node features x0. This allows us to formulate the point cloud encoder as a message-passing Graph Neural Network (GNN) (Scarselli et al., 2009), a flexible frame-work that encompasses numerous well-known architectures. The point cloud encoder returns a tokenized embedding of the observed point cloud {Ti} ∈ Rn×d. For PointPatch ar-chitectures, a positional encoding based on the patch center is also added to each token. 

3.4. Fourier Feature Mapping 

Neural networks are biased toward learning low-frequency components first, while high-frequency components con-verge slowly or may not be learned at all (Rahaman et al., 2019; Tancik et al., 2020). However, an IL policy parametrized by a neural network may need to learn a high frequency function to represent a sharp decision boundary, such as whether to reposition a grasped object or insert it. In 3D point clouds, a Fourier feature mapping allows the network to better distinguish points that are otherwise simi-lar in Cartesian space. For a denoising diffusion model, this would allow the network to represent a score function that is a high-frequency function of the scene geometry, though not necessarily of the actions. In contrast to previous work that adds Fourier features to specific, novel architectures (Wilcox et al., 2025), we hypothesize that applying a Fourier feature mapping to Cartesian points feature benefits essentially any point cloud-based policy. We adopt a NeRF-style, axis-aligned Fourier feature mapping (Mildenhall et al., 2021). Let 

p = ( x, y, z ) ∈ R3 define a Cartesian point. The encoding function γ : R → R2L applies sinusoids of different wave-lengths λk separately to the three coordinate values in p via the transformation 

γk(x) = 



sin 

 2πx λk



, cos 

 2πx λk

T

,λk = λmax 

 λmin 

λmax 

 k−1

> L−1

, k = 1 , . . . , L ,(4) where L is the number of frequency bands. As the Fourier feature mapping is periodic, the point cloud must be bounded by the interval [−λmax /2, λ max /2] to en-4Fourier Features for Point Cloud Imitation Learning  

> Figure 4. Left : Setup for the real-world drawer experiments.
> Right : RGB views from left, right and gripper cameras and depth view from the left camera.

sure unique features. If this is not possible, the input Carte-sian coordinates can be concatenated with the Fourier fea-tures, which always yields a unique mapping. 

3.5. Data Augmentation 

The choice of wavelengths λk is essential, as too short wave-lengths may cause the network to overfit on the data, while too long wavelengths may not resolve the spectral bias (Tan-cik et al., 2020). Previous work using Fourier features for consistency models has even observed training instability with some hyperparameters (Song & Dhariwal, 2024). In-stead of carefully tuning the wavelengths to each task, we choose a consistent set of wavelengths and use data aug-mentation to train the network to ignore frequencies that do not contain useful information. To achieve this, we apply VariableJitter (Gyenes et al., 2025), which samples the noise scale σ ∼ U (0 , σ max ) from a uniform distribution for each point cloud. Compared to uniform jitter, which applies noise 

ϵ ∼ U (−σ, σ ) drawn from a fixed distribution to each point, this process avoids the difficulty of tuning the amplitude of typical uniform jitter. It ensures a trade-off between aug-menting the data to reduce overfitting and ensuring there is no gap between training and testing data. 

## 4. Experiments 

4.1. Benchmarks and Datasets 

We evaluate our approach on two widely used simulation benchmarks, RoboCasa (Nasiriany et al., 2024) and Mani-Skill3 (Tao et al., 2025), as well as on four challenging real-world tasks (Jia et al., 2025a). Figure 3 visualizes ex-emplary tasks from all task suites. All models are trained in a multi-task setting, where the policy is provided a goal description in text form. RoboCasa and real world tasks include two static cameras and an in-hand camera, while ManiSkill3 tasks use only a static camera. In order to high-light the effect of Fourier features on 3D representations, we do not provide color features in simulation. Appendix A.1 provides additional details on all tasks. 

RoboCasa. RoboCasa (Nasiriany et al., 2024) includes high-precision, long-horizon manipulation tasks in visually rich kitchen scenes. We focus on 16 atomic tasks that stress fine geometric alignment and contact, which is where spectral bias is most detrimental. For each task we use 50 human-collected demonstrations provided by RoboCasa. 

ManiSkill3. We further test on ManiSkill3 (Tao et al., 2025), where we evaluate on four tasks covering grasping and tool usage. Since the majority of tasks use color information to indicate some aspect of the target, we map the target’s Cartesian coordinates to Fourier features and pass this as an additional goal token. We train on 500 demonstrations per task generated by an expert policies. 

Real World. Finally, we adapt four challenging real-world tasks (Jia et al., 2025a) that feature long horizons, multi-ple phases, and precise manipulation. Figure 4 displays our setup, which consists of two static Zed Mini cameras and a RealSense D405 as an in-hand camera. Each task is comprised of distinct sub-tasks with different goal de-scriptions, such as “stack the red cup in the blue cup” for the “Cup-Stacking” task. For these complex tasks involving color information, we adopt a multi-modal approach utiliz-ing RGB images and point clouds. Early experiments with unimodal methods were not successful. We use between 75 

and 102 human demonstrations, depending on the task. 

Preprocessing. Points beyond a maximum depth ( 2m in ManiSkill3 and the real world and 10 m in RoboCasa) are removed. In ManiSkill and the real world, point clouds are further cropped to remove the irrelevant background points, and in ManiSkill, the table surface is also removed. We apply random downsampling to 32768 points followed by voxel downsampling with a voxel size of 1 cm . We sample a 

σmax for VariableJitter up to 5 mm for ManiSkill, 2 mm for RoboCasa, and 1 mm for the real world, which augments the training data manifold while preserving crucial geometric details preserved. Camera observations are resized to 128 ×

128 for ManiSkill tasks and 224 × 224 for RoboCasa. 

4.2. Architectures and Baselines 

We instantiate the denoising diffusion model as a decoder-only transformer. The transformer receives as input a goal token, a noise level token, H noisy action tokens, where 

H is the action horizon, and a number of observation to-kens that are provided by a separate architecture, such as a point cloud encoder. A frozen CLIP RN-50 model (Radford et al., 2021) is used to embed the goal description into a token, while the noise level is encoded as in DDPM (Ho et al., 2020). A learned token position embedding is added onto each token, except for observation tokens when the number of tokens is variable. After the transformer layers, the final H tokens are passed through a linear layer to arrive at denoised actions. To highlight the effect of Fourier features for diffusion IL, 5Fourier Features for Point Cloud Imitation Learning PointPatch PointPatch-attn PCM DP3 Baseline     

> PointTransformer PointPatch + RGB PointPatch + RGB (pretrained) + FF
> PointMap RGB

0

10 

20 

30 

40 

50 

60 

70 RoboCasa ManiSkill3 Real  

> Mean Success Rate ( %)
> Figure 5. Mean success rate across all tasks of 3D encoders with and without Fourier features on RoboCasa (left), ManiSkill3 (middle), and the real world (right). Methods using Fourier Features are marked via hatched bars, and methods are displayed in the order of the legend at the top. Across diverse tasks and architectures, Fourier features provide a consistent and meaningful benefit to task performance.

we use the same diffusion backbone across all experiments and vary only the observation encoder across experiments. All architectures are instantiations of message neural net-works with different aggregations and parameterizations for the learnable functions. We evaluate three variants as repre-sentative examples of the point-patching paradigm, which differ mainly in how they aggregate across patch tokens. 

PointPatch does not aggregate the patch tokens before the denoising step (Pang et al., 2022; Yu et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2023; Zhou et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2024), allow-ing each denoising step to attend to different parts of the observation. PointPatch-attn aggregates using attention pooling (Gyenes et al., 2024) to produce 3 tokens in all cases, which decreases computational cost. Lastly, the encoder re-ferred to as “PointNet” in Point Cloud Matters (Zhu et al., 2024), which we call PCM , uses max pooling to aggregate across point patches. Furthermore, we apply Fourier fea-tures to existing architectures DP3 (Ze et al., 2024), which applies max pooling across all points to create a single token, and PointTransformer , which uses attention to aggregate local regions iteratively. We make only minimal, neces-sary changes to each architecture, and apply Fourier feature mappings to absolute and/or relative point coordinates as required by the method. RGB images and pointmaps are tokenized using ConvNeXt V2 nano (Woo et al., 2023), a fully convolutional architecture. In PointPatch + RGB ,we tokenize RGB images and point clouds separately, and concatenate tokens from the RGB modality to the tokens from the point cloud modality. More details on architectures are available in Appendix A.2. 

4.3. Setup and Experiments. Research Questions. Our experiments are designed to answer the following research questions: Q1) Do Fourier features yield consistent benefits across point cloud encoders and benchmarks? Q2) Does the benefit of Fourier feature mappings translate from simulation to real-world tasks? 

Q3) How should these features be parameterized? Q4) How task-dependent are their effects? To answer these questions, we first explore a series of simu-lation benchmarks and evaluate several point cloud encoders with and without Fourier features. Next, we train our poli-cies on real-world data and evaluate them on a real robot. Finally, we then conduct an extensive parameter study and spectral analysis of our policies. 

Training and Evaluation. Each method is trained with 5

random seeds, and we test performance at 3 checkpoints. We measure the average success rate across 50 rollouts for RoboCasa and 100 rollouts for ManiSkill and select the best-performing checkpoint for each seed. We use bootstrapping and report the interquartile mean with 95% confidence in-tervals. See Appendix A.4 for further details. 

Fourier Features. We use a fixed set of L=16 frequency bands with log-spaced wavelengths between λmax =4.0 m and λmin =2.0 cm for all experiments. The choice of λmax 

ensures both the sin and cos components of the largest band are unique within the task space, which is typical bounded to roughly [−2, 2] 3, while λmin is small enough to discrimi-nate neighboring voxels. The resulting 3×(2 L)=96 Fourier features per Cartesian point encode positions across this scale range, ranging from a global encoding at λmax to a voxel-level encoding at λmin . See Appendix A.3 for addi-tional hyperparameters. 

## 5. Results 

Simulation Results. Figure 5 shows average success rates over all tasks for RoboCasa and ManiSkill3. Tables 6 and 7 in the appendix provide detailed, per-task results for both benchmarks, respectively. In RoboCasa, we observe that Fourier feature mappings significantly boost both aggregate 6Fourier Features for Point Cloud Imitation Learning 

success rate and success rates on a large number of indi-vidual tasks. For example, PointPatch on CloseDrawer im-proves from 34% to 72% , and TurnOffSinkFaucet improves from 28% to 63% , while the overall average increases from 

13% to 34% . Similarly, the OpenDrawer task improves from almost no success at all to 12% . Despite using substan-tially different architectures, DP3 and PCM show similar trends, with both methods clearly benefitting from the use of Fourier features. While the relative ranking of differ-ent architectures is task-dependent, we find that the im-provements from Fourier features are relatively consistent across architectures and task difficulties. We hypothesize that these improvements come from the Fourier mappings exposing high-frequency geometric cues to the denoising model, which alleviates their spectral bias and thus allows learning sharper, more meaningful token representations. Multimodal encoders that use RGB in conjunction with point clouds also benefit from Fourier features, despite the fact that the convolutional RGB tokenizer already has the ca-pacity to represent high frequency functions. This highlights the potential for integrating Fourier features into large, multi-modal models trained on internet-scale data. On ManiSkill3 tasks, we observe only minor improvements to PointPatch and PointPatch-attn but no significant improvement to other architectures. We hypothesize this is partly due to saturation on these relatively simple tasks. 

Real World Results. We evaluate our best-performing method, PointPatch + RGB, with and without Fourier fea-tures for 16 rollouts on each real world task. Full results are in Appendix A.6. Table 8 shows that policies with Fourier features achieve significantly higher scores on all tasks, with an aggregate improvement from 14 .8% to 40 .23% . The policy without Fourier demonstrates especially poor perfor-mance on the Cup-Stacking task, often because it knocks the cup over while trying to grasp it. The least benefit is observed on the Folding task, which also requires the least geometric precision to carry out. These results demonstrate the Fourier features do not overfit on artifacts and are robust to real world conditions such as noisy depth measurements, occlusion artifacts, and camera miscalibration. Surprisingly, Fourier features greatly increase the performance of the PointPatch + RGB (pretrained) encoder on real world tasks, even though the performance gain on simulation tasks was more minor. This suggests that Fourier features remain ef-fective even on more difficult tasks and when combined in more complex architectures. Table 9 shows further results on the Cup-Stacking task grouped by cup diameter. As cup size decreases, the benefit of Fourier features increases, al-beit with the smallest cups, neither policy is able to solve the task consistently. This supports our claim that Fourier features allow the encoder to extract geometric details at smaller scales. 

Qualitative Results. We find that policies trained on Fourier feature mappings move faster and more decisively, and more closely imitate the demonstration data. Policies trained with-out Fourier features tend to hesitate before making contact with objects, or behave as if they cannot perceive the scene. In the real world, the policies without Fourier features were often catastrophically unable to learn the data 1. We hy-pothesize that due to the spectral bias of their MLP layers, these policies were overfitting on some global features of the observed point cloud rather than responding to the fine geometry near the end effector. See Appendix A.5 for a qualitative comparison of results on select RoboCasa tasks. 

## 6. Analysis PointPatch + FF # Points 1.0 1.5 2.0 3.0 5.0 

0

10 

20 

30 

40  

> Voxel Size (cm)
> Mean Success Rate (%)
> 2k
> 4.5k
> 9k
> 15k
> 18k
> Approx. Point Count
> Figure 6. Success rates with and without Fourier features on point clouds of different sizes, achieved by voxel downsampling of the observations. Larger point clouds contain richer geometric detail, resulting in a larger benefit for Fourier features.

For additional experiments, we use a reduced set of 8 Robo-Casa tasks, utilizing the Pressing Buttons, Turning Levers, and Twisting Knobs task groups. Unless specified other-wise, we use the PointPatch encoder. We train a single policy on all 8 tasks, reporting the mean and 95% bootstrap confidence interval over 5 seeds for each method. 

6.1. Frequency Analysis Point Cloud Size. Since denser point clouds contain richer geometric detail, we expect Fourier features to provide a greater benefit with larger point clouds. To reduce point cloud sizes while retaining their overall structure, we in-crease the voxel size used for voxel downsampling. Fig-ure 6 shows that point cloud size has a large effect on the performance of Fourier features, with the gap narrowing significantly for point clouds with 2k points. This demon-strates that Fourier features are more effective when point clouds contain more geometric detail to extract. Interest-ingly, the baseline method is essentially unaffected by the 

> 1We provide rollout videos for real world tasks on our project page: https://fourier-il.github.io/fourier-il.

7Fourier Features for Point Cloud Imitation Learning + Noise ( σ=5.0 cm) no FF CoffeeServeMug 

> CoffeeSetupMug
> TurnOffStove
> TurnOnStove
> CloseDoubleDoor
> OpenDrawer
> OpenSingleDoor
> TurnSinkSpout
> Overall
> TurnOnMicrowave
> OpenDoubleDoor
> CoffeePressButton
> TurnOffSinkFaucet
> CloseDrawer
> TurnOnSinkFaucet
> TurnOffMicrowave
> CloseSingleDoor

−40 

−30 

−20 

−10 

0

> Success Rate Drop (%)

Figure 7. Absolute drop in success rate for each RoboCasa task resulting from removing Fourier features from the PointPatch policy architecture ( no FF ) or removing fine geometric information in the observation using Gaussian jitter ( + Noise( σ=5.0 cm )). Even when high frequency information is removed, Fourier features still provide a meaningful benefit, perhaps by improving the learning dynamics of the policy. PointPatch PointPatch-attn + FF 

PCM DP3 Baseline 0 0.5 1

10 −9

10 −2

10 5

> Power Density

Before Training 

0 0.5 1

After Training 

Eigenvalue λ

Figure 8. Graph Fourier spectra of the sensitivities of various archi-tectures with respect to input point coordinates. During training, sensitivities increase by several orders of magnitude across all fre-quencies, and Fourier features also increase sensitivity by several more orders of magnitude relative to the baseline. The peak near eigenvalue of 1 indicates the orthogonal response, i.e. the isolated contribution of each point to the prediction. 

heavy downsampling, suggesting that it does not condition on the geometric details that are removed by this process. 

Task-Dependent Fine Geometry. The previous result raises the question - is there any observable pattern be-tween the characteristics of a task and the effect of Fourier features? Is the advantage limited to tasks requiring fine manipulation? To investigate this, we train a policy with Fourier features and add Gaussian jitter with σ=5.0 cm to the point clouds during training and rollout. This extreme level of jitter effectively removes any fine geometric infor-mation from the observation. We compare this against the drop in performance to that when Fourier features are not used. Figure 7 shows that the advantage of Fourier features is not limited to tasks with fine geometry. There is only a weak correlation between the effect of removing the policy’s abil-ity to condition on geometric details ( no FF ) and removing the geometric details themselves from the observation ( +Noise( σ=5.0 cm )). Furthermore, the policies with jitter still significantly outperform those without Fourier features, with an average success rate of 24% vs. 13% across Robo-Casa tasks. The broader benefit of Fourier features in the absence of fine geometry may be due to an improvement in learning dynamics in the policy. 

Spectral Density. To show how architectural changes are reflected in the policy’s sensitivity to spatial frequencies, we adapt a method from Miao et al. (2024). First, we create a “saliency point cloud”, where each point contains the gradi-ent of the predicted actions with respect to its coordinates. We take the Graph Fourier Transform (GFT) of this point cloud to quantify how rapidly this gradient varies between neighboring points, and visualize the spectrum of eigenval-ues in Figure 8. We find that Fourier features increase the sensitivity of the network to high frequencies, as well as low ones. Since the sensitivites of all networks increase during training, Fourier features allow networks to learn the data more quickly. This suggests that the advantage of Fourier features may be due to their increased sensitivity to mid- and low-frequency bands as well. To further isolate this effect, Appendix A.7 also shows a spectral analysis of untrained PointNets on a synthetic unit sphere, confirming 8Fourier Features for Point Cloud Imitation Learning 

that Fourier features shift the model’s inductive bias toward high-frequency components ( λ > 1.0) from initialization. 

6.2. Parameter Studies 8 16 32 0.01 0.02 0.05 0.1 0.2                

> 35
> 40
> 45 L(λmin =0 .02) λmin (L=16)
> Mean Success Rate (%)
> Figure 9. Parameter study of different Fourier feature wavelength configurations. Performance is robust to different numbers Lof log-spaced wavelengths ( left ), as well as to the minimum wave-length λmin (right) around our default of λmin =0 .02 ,L=16 .
> Table 1. Parameter study on jitter augmentation and Fourier feature encoding. Our method uses logspaced Fourier Features (FFs) and VariableJitter. Top : While VariableJitter slightls improves perfor-mance, data augmentation appears not to be essential. Bottom :Log-spaced, axis-aligned frequencies perform better than sampling randomly from a Gaussian (RFF). Learning the frequencies either directly or with Sinusoidal Positional Encoding (SPE) does not show a consistent benefit.

Configuration Mean Success Rate (%) Ours 41.4 ± 2.4 

Jitter Augmentation 

no FFs, no jitter 17 .5 ± 1.7

no FFs, random jitter 17 .0 ± 1.6

no FFs, VariableJitter 18 .5 ± 2.1

FFs, no jitter 39 .9 ± 2.3

FFs, random jitter 38 .9 ± 2.2

Fourier Feature Encoding 

log-spaced + SPE 37 .2 ± 2.2

RFF 24 .0 ± 2.0

RFF + learned 22 .9 ± 1.8

RFF + SPE 22 .5 ± 1.8

RFF + Cartesian 23 .4 ± 1.9

Jitter. To investigate the robustness of Fourier features, we consider different options for the jitter data augmenta-tion, namely no jitter, standard random jitter drawn from 

∼ U (−σmax , σ max ), and VariableJitter as described in Sub-section 3.5. Table 1 ( top ) shows that data augmentation may not be essential when using Fourier features, although VariableJitter may provide a minor boost over random jitter. 

Wavelengths. We experiment with different numbers of wavelengths and a range of minimum wavelengths in Fig-ure 9 ( middle ). While 16 wavelengths perform somewhat better than 8 or 32 , Fourier features are robust to a wide range of minimum wavelengths. Unlike in related work using Fourier features for NeRFs, we do not see any bene-fit to task-specific tuning of wavelength ranges (Sun et al., 2024). Together with the above, this consistency indicates that Fourier features used in diffusion IL are relatively insen-sitive to hyperparameters or changes in the training setup. 

Learned and Gaussian Fourier Features. Sun et al. (2024) find that optimizing the frequencies directly through gradient descent is suboptimal, and they instead propose Sinusoidal Positional Encoding (SPE), which applies a linear layer and a sinusoidal non-linearity instead. Fur-thermore, instead of purely on-axis frequencies, Tancik et al. (2020) suggest randomly sampling frequency vec-tors v ∼ N (0 , σ 2) from an isotropic normal distribution, where we set σ=10 . In this case, the encoding function 

γ : R3 → R2 applied to Cartesian point p is defined as 

γk(p) = [sin(2 πvk ·p), cos(2 πvk ·p)] T for k = 1 , . . . , L .These Gaussian random Fourier features (RFFs) can like-wise be learned either by directly optimizing frequencies or with SPE. Table 1 ( bottom ) evaluates different combi-nations of log-spaced and Gaussian RFFs with different methods for learning frequencies. We find that simply using a fixed encoding with log-spaced frequencies works best. 

## 7. Conclusion 

Neural networks are biased towards learning low-frequency functions of their inputs. In point cloud IL, this results in policies that ignore the high-frequency information that is essential for high-precision manipulation, such as insertion tasks or grasping. We incorporate the well-known Fourier feature mapping introduced in NeRF (Mildenhall et al., 2021) into a variety of point cloud-based Imitation Learning methods and test them on high-precision manipulation tasks in simulation and on a real robot. We demonstrate that simply encoding the policy’s coordi-nate inputs via Fourier features provides significant and consistent performance benefits. These benefits hold across RoboCasa and ManiSkill3 tasks of varying difficulty and are consistent across different point cloud encoders. Further-more, performance also improves in multimodal architec-tures and are robust to real world noise and camera artifacts. Our analysis confirms that Fourier features are most helpful when point clouds contain rich geometric information, and seem to improve learning dynamics even in the absence of fine geometry. Parameter studies further show that Fourier features are robust to most hyperparameters, making them easy to use at essentially no additional cost. We thus argue that Fourier features should be used with practically any point cloud encoder architecture rather than Cartesian point features. Future work may investigate gradient-based learn-ing of the optimal wavelengths or additional regularization to improve scalability. 9Fourier Features for Point Cloud Imitation Learning 

## Acknowledgments 

The present contribution is supported by the Helmholtz As-sociation under the joint research school “HIDSS4Health – Helmholtz Information and Data Science School for Health. This work was supported by the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon Europe pro-gramme through the project SMARTI 3 (Grant Agreement No. 101171393). The authors gratefully acknowledge the computing time provided on the high-performance computer HoreKa by the National High-Performance Computing Cen-ter at KIT (NHR@KIT). This center is jointly supported by the Federal Ministry of Education and Research and the Ministry of Science, Research and the Arts of Baden-W ¨urttemberg, as part of the National High-Performance Computing (NHR) joint funding program. HoreKa is partly funded by the German Research Foundation (DFG). This work was supported by the Helmholtz Association’s Initia-tive and Networking Fund on the HAICORE@KIT parti-tion. 

## Impact Statement 

This paper presents work whose goal is to advance the field of machine learning. There are many potential societal consequences of our work, none of which we feel must be specifically highlighted here. 

## References 

Abello, A. A., Hirata, R., and Wang, Z. Dissecting the high-frequency bias in convolutional neural networks. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pp. 863–871, 2021. Agarwal, R., Schwarzer, M., Castro, P. S., Courville, A., and Bellemare, M. G. Deep reinforcement learning at the edge of the statistical precipice. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2021. Barron, J. T., Mildenhall, B., Verbin, D., Srinivasan, P. P., and Hedman, P. Mip-nerf 360: Unbounded anti-aliased neural radiance fields. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition ,pp. 5470–5479, 2022. Black, K., Brown, N., Driess, D., Esmail, A., Equi, M., Finn, C., Fusai, N., Groom, L., Hausman, K., Ichter, B., et al. 

π 0: A vision-language-action flow model for general robot control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.24164 , 2024. Brohan, A., Brown, N., Carbajal, J., Chebotar, Y., Dabis, J., Finn, C., Gopalakrishnan, K., Hausman, K., Herzog, A., Hsu, J., et al. Rt-1: Robotics transformer for real-world control at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.06817 , 2022. Chen, G., Wang, M., Yang, Y., Yu, K., Yuan, L., and Yue, Y. Pointgpt: Auto-regressively generative pre-training from point clouds. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36:29667–29679, 2023. Chen, S., Garcia, R., Laptev, I., and Schmid, C. Sugar: Pre-training 3d visual representations for robotics. In Proceed-ings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pp. 18049–18060, June 2024. Chi, C., Feng, S., Du, Y., Xu, Z., Cousineau, E., Burchfiel, B., and Song, S. Diffusion policy: Visuomotor policy learning via action diffusion. In Proceedings of Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS) , 2023. Chung, F. R. Spectral Graph Theory , volume 92. American Mathematical Soc., 1997. Donat, A., Jia, X., Huang, X., Taranovic, A., Blessing, D., Li, G., Zhou, H., Zhang, H., Lioutikov, R., and Neu-mann, G. Towards fusing point cloud and visual repre-sentations for imitation learning. In 7th Robot Learning Workshop: Towards Robots with Human-Level Abilities ,2025. URL https://openreview.net/forum? id=5cG7ilWX1V .Gao, Z., Dai, W., and Zhang, Y. Adaptive positional en-coding for bundle-adjusting neural radiance fields. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , pp. 3284–3294, 2023. Gervet, T., Xian, Z., Gkanatsios, N., and Fragkiadaki, K. Act3d: 3d feature field transformers for multi-task robotic manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.17817 , 2023. Goyal, A., Xu, J., Guo, Y., Blukis, V., Chao, Y.-W., and Fox, D. Rvt: Robotic view transformer for 3d object manipulation. In Conference on Robot Learning , pp. 694– 710. PMLR, 2023. Gyenes, B., Franke, N., Becker, P., and Neumann, G. PointpatchRL - masked reconstruction improves rein-forcement learning on point clouds. In 8th Annual Conference on Robot Learning , 2024. URL https: //openreview.net/forum?id=3jNEz3kUSl .Gyenes, B., Franke, N., Scheikl, P. M., Henrich, P., Younis, R., Neumann, G., Wagner, M., and Mathis-Ullrich, F. Point cloud segmentation for autonomous clip positioning in laparoscopic cholecystectomy on a phantom. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , 10(8):8522–8529, 2025. doi: 10.1109/LRA.2025.3585357. He, K., Zhang, X., Ren, S., and Sun, J. Deep residual learning for image recognition, 2015. URL https:// arxiv.org/abs/1512.03385 .10 Fourier Features for Point Cloud Imitation Learning 

Ho, J., Jain, A., and Abbeel, P. Denoising diffusion proba-bilistic models. Advances in neural information process-ing systems , 33:6840–6851, 2020. Hornik, K., Stinchcombe, M., and White, H. Multilayer feedforward networks are universal approximators. 

Neural Networks , 2(5):359–366, 1989. ISSN 0893-6080. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/0893-6080(89)90020-8. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/ science/article/pii/0893608089900208 .Intelligence, P., Black, K., Brown, N., Darpinian, J., Dha-balia, K., Driess, D., Esmail, A., Equi, M., Finn, C., Fusai, N., Galliker, M. Y., Ghosh, D., Groom, L., Haus-man, K., Ichter, B., Jakubczak, S., Jones, T., Ke, L., LeBlanc, D., Levine, S., Li-Bell, A., Mothukuri, M., Nair, S., Pertsch, K., Ren, A. Z., Shi, L. X., Smith, L., Springenberg, J. T., Stachowicz, K., Tanner, J., Vuong, Q., Walke, H., Walling, A., Wang, H., Yu, L., and Zhilinsky, U. π0.5: a vision-language-action model with open-world generalization, 2025. URL https: //arxiv.org/abs/2504.16054 .Jia, X., Wang, Q., Wang, A., Wang, H., Gyenes, B., Gospodi-nov, E., Jiang, X., Li, G., Zhou, H., Liao, W., Huang, X., Beck, M., Reuss, M., Lioutikov, R., and Neumann, G. Pointmappolicy: Structured point cloud processing for multi-modal imitation learning. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , 2025a. URL https://openreview.net/ forum?id=ZR2mdBrhJX .Jia, Y., Liu, J., Chen, S., Gu, C., Wang, Z., Luo, L., Li, X., Wang, P., Wang, Z., Zhang, R., and Zhang, S. Lift3d pol-icy: Lifting 2d foundation models for robust 3d robotic manipulation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Con-ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pp. 17347–17358, June 2025b. Jo, J. and Bengio, Y. Measuring the tendency of cnns to learn surface statistical regularities. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.11561 , 2017. Karras, T., Aittala, M., Aila, T., and Laine, S. Elucidat-ing the design space of diffusion-based generative mod-els. In Oh, A. H., Agarwal, A., Belgrave, D., and Cho, K. (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2022. URL https://openreview.net/ forum?id=k7FuTOWMOc7 .Ke, T.-W., Gkanatsios, N., and Fragkiadaki, K. 3d diffuser actor: Policy diffusion with 3d scene repre-sentations. In Agrawal, P., Kroemer, O., and Bur-gard, W. (eds.), Proceedings of The 8th Conference on Robot Learning , volume 270 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pp. 1949–1974. PMLR, 06–09 Nov 2025. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/ v270/ke25a.html .Lai, X., Liu, J., Jiang, L., Wang, L., Zhao, H., Liu, S., Qi, X., and Jia, J. Stratified transformer for 3d point cloud segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pp. 8500–8509, June 2022. Li, C., Wen, J., Peng, Y., Peng, Y., and Zhu, Y. Pointvla: Injecting the 3d world into vision-language-action models. 

IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , 11(3):2506–2513, 2026. doi: 10.1109/LRA.2026.3653303. Lipman, Y., Chen, R. T. Q., Ben-Hamu, H., Nickel, M., and Le, M. Flow matching for generative modeling. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Represen-tations , 2023. URL https://openreview.net/ forum?id=PqvMRDCJT9t .Lippe, P., Veeling, B., Perdikaris, P., Turner, R., and Brand-stetter, J. Pde-refiner: Achieving accurate long rollouts with neural pde solvers. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36:67398–67433, 2023. Miao, Y., Dong, Y., Zhang, J., Yu, L., Yang, X., and Gao, X.-S. Improving robustness of 3d point cloud recognition from a fourier perspective. Advances in Neural Informa-tion Processing Systems , 37:68183–68210, 2024. Mildenhall, B., Srinivasan, P. P., Tancik, M., Barron, J. T., Ramamoorthi, R., and Ng, R. Nerf: Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view synthesis. Communica-tions of the ACM , 65(1):99–106, 2021. Nasiriany, S., Maddukuri, A., Zhang, L., Parikh, A., Lo, A., Joshi, A., Mandlekar, A., and Zhu, Y. Robocasa: Large-scale simulation of everyday tasks for generalist robots. In Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS) , 2024. Pang, Y., Wang, W., Tay, F. E., Liu, W., Tian, Y., and Yuan, L. Masked autoencoders for point cloud self-supervised learning. In European Conference on Computer Vision ,pp. 604–621. Springer, 2022. Qi, C. R., Su, H., Mo, K., and Guibas, L. J. Pointnet: Deep learning on point sets for 3d classification and segmenta-tion. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pp. 652–660, 2017a. Qi, C. R., Yi, L., Su, H., and Guibas, L. J. Pointnet++: Deep hierarchical feature learning on point sets in a metric space. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.02413 , 2017b. Qian, G., Li, Y., Peng, H., Mai, J., Hammoud, H., El-hoseiny, M., and Ghanem, B. Pointnext: Revisiting pointnet++ with improved training and scaling strategies. 

Advances in neural information processing systems , 35: 23192–23204, 2022. 11 Fourier Features for Point Cloud Imitation Learning 

Radford, A., Kim, J. W., Hallacy, C., Ramesh, A., Goh, G., Agarwal, S., Sastry, G., Askell, A., Mishkin, P., Clark, J., et al. Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision. In International conference on machine learning , pp. 8748–8763. PmLR, 2021. Rahaman, N., Baratin, A., Arpit, D., Draxler, F., Lin, M., Hamprecht, F., Bengio, Y., and Courville, A. On the spectral bias of neural networks. In Chaud-huri, K. and Salakhutdinov, R. (eds.), Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learn-ing , volume 97 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pp. 5301–5310. PMLR, 09–15 Jun 2019. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v97/ rahaman19a.html .Reuss, M., Li, M., Jia, X., and Lioutikov, R. Goal con-ditioned imitation learning using score-based diffusion policies. In Proceedings of Robotics: Science and Sys-tems (RSS) , 2023. Scarselli, F., Gori, M., Tsoi, A. C., Hagenbuchner, M., and Monfardini, G. The graph neural network model. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks , 20(1):61–80, 2009. doi: 10.1109/TNN.2008.2005605. Song, J., Meng, C., and Ermon, S. Denoising diffusion implicit models. In ICLR , 2021. Song, Y. and Dhariwal, P. Improved techniques for training consistency models. In The Twelfth International Confer-ence on Learning Representations , 2024. URL https: //openreview.net/forum?id=WNzy9bRDvG .Sun, C., Yuan, Z., Xu, K., Mai, L., Siddharth, N., Chen, S., and Marina, M. K. Learning high-frequency functions made easy with sinusoidal positional encoding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.09370 , 2024. Tancik, M., Srinivasan, P. P., Mildenhall, B., Fridovich-Keil, S., Raghavan, N., Singhal, U., Ramamoorthi, R., Barron, J. T., and Ng, R. Fourier features let networks learn high frequency functions in low dimensional domains. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , NIPS ’20, Red Hook, NY, USA, 2020. Curran Associates Inc. ISBN 9781713829546. Tao, S., Xiang, F., Shukla, A., Qin, Y., Hinrichsen, X., Yuan, X., Bao, C., Lin, X., Liu, Y., Chan, T.-K., Gao, Y., Li, X., Mu, T., Xiao, N., Gurha, A., N, V., Choi, Y. W., Chen, Y.-R., Huang, Z., Calandra, R., Chen, R., Luo, S., and Su, H. Maniskill3: GPU parallelized robot simulation and rendering for generalizable embodied AI. In 7th Robot Learning Workshop: Towards Robots with Human-Level Abilities , 2025. URL https://openreview.net/ forum?id=GgTxudXaU8 .Vincent, P. A connection between score matching and de-noising autoencoders. Neural Computation , 23(7):1661– 1674, 2011. doi: 10.1162/NECO a 00142. Von Luxburg, U. A tutorial on spectral clustering. Statistics and computing , 17(4):395–416, 2007. Wang, H., Wu, X., Huang, Z., and Xing, E. P. High-frequency component helps explain the generalization of convolutional neural networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pp. 8684–8694, 2020. Wang, S., Leroy, V., Cabon, Y., Chidlovskii, B., and Revaud, J. Dust3r: Geometric 3d vision made easy. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pp. 20697–20709, 2024. Wilcox, A., Ghanem, M., Moghani, M., Barroso, P., Joffe, B., and Garg, A. Adapt3r: Adaptive 3d scene rep-resentation for domain transfer in imitation learning. 

CoRR , abs/2503.04877, March 2025. URL https: //doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2503.04877 .Woo, S., Debnath, S., Hu, R., Chen, X., Liu, Z., Kweon, I. S., and Xie, S. Convnext v2: Co-designing and scal-ing convnets with masked autoencoders. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.00808 , 2023. Wu, R., Chen, Y., Swamy, G., Brantley, K., and Sun, W. Diffusing states and matching scores: A new frame-work for imitation learning. In The Thirteenth In-ternational Conference on Learning Representations ,2025. URL https://openreview.net/forum? id=kWRKNDU6uN .W ¨urth, T., Freymuth, N., Neumann, G., and K ¨arger, L. Diffusion-based hierarchical graph neural networks for simulating nonlinear solid mechanics. Advances in Neu-ral Information Processing Systems , 39, 2026. Yu, X., Tang, L., Rao, Y., Huang, T., Zhou, J., and Lu, J. Point-bert: Pre-training 3d point cloud transformers with masked point modeling. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition ,pp. 19313–19322, 2022. Ze, Y., Zhang, G., Zhang, K., Hu, C., Wang, M., and Xu, H. 3d diffusion policy: Generalizable visuomotor policy learning via simple 3d representations. In Proceedings of Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS) , 2024. Ze, Y., Chen, Z., Wang, W., Chen, T., He, X., Yuan, Y., Peng, X. B., and Wu, J. Generalizable humanoid manipulation with 3d diffusion policies, 2025. URL 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.10803 .12 Fourier Features for Point Cloud Imitation Learning 

Zelnik-Manor, L. and Perona, P. Self-tuning spectral cluster-ing. Advances in neural information processing systems ,17, 2004. Zhao, H., Jiang, L., Jia, J., Torr, P. H., and Koltun, V. Point transformer. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF interna-tional conference on computer vision , pp. 16259–16268, 2021. Zhao, T. Z., Kumar, V., Levine, S., and Finn, C. Learn-ing Fine-Grained Bimanual Manipulation with Low-Cost Hardware. In Proceedings of Robotics: Science and Systems , Daegu, Republic of Korea, July 2023. doi: 10.15607/RSS.2023.XIX.016. Zhou, J., Wang, J., Ma, B., Liu, Y.-S., Huang, T., and Wang, X. Uni3d: Exploring unified 3d representation at scale. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2024. URL https://openreview. net/forum?id=wcaE4Dfgt8 .Zhu, H., Wang, Y., Huang, D., Ye, W., Ouyang, W., and He, T. Point cloud matters: Rethinking the impact of different observation spaces on robot learning. In The Thirty-eight Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track , 2024. URL https: //openreview.net/forum?id=zgSnSZ0Re6 .Zhu, M., Zhu, Y., Li, J., Wen, J., Xu, Z., Liu, N., Cheng, R., Shen, C., Peng, Y., Feng, F., et al. Scaling diffusion policy in transformer to 1 billion parameters for robotic manipulation. In 2025 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pp. 10838–10845. IEEE, 2025. Zitkovich, B., Yu, T., Xu, S., Xu, P., Xiao, T., Xia, F., Wu, J., Wohlhart, P., Welker, S., Wahid, A., et al. Rt-2: Vision-language-action models transfer web knowledge to robotic control. In Conference on Robot Learning , pp. 2165–2183. PMLR, 2023. 13 Fourier Features for Point Cloud Imitation Learning 

## A. Appendix 

A.1. Tasks 

Figure 10. Overview of RoboCasa Simulation Environments. Example kitchen scenes and tasks illustrating the diversity of household manipulation settings provided by RoboCasa.                      

> Category Task Description
> Insertion CoffeeServeMug Remove the mug from the holder and place it on the counter. CoffeeSetupMug Place the mug into the coffee machine’s mug holder. Pressing Buttons CoffeePressButton Press the button to pour coffee into the mug. TurnOnMicrowave Start the microwave by pressing the start button. TurnOffMicrowave Stop the microwave by pressing the stop button. Turning Levers TurnOnSinkFaucet Turn on the sink faucet to start water flow. TurnOffSinkFaucet Turn off the sink faucet to stop water flow. TurnSinkSpout Rotate the sink spout. Twisting Knobs TurnOnStove Turn on a specific stove burner by twisting its knob. TurnOffStove Turn off a specific stove burner by twisting its knob. Open/Close Drawers OpenDrawer Open a drawer. CloseDrawer Close a drawer. Opening and Closing Doors OpenSingleDoor Open a microwave door or a cabinet with a single door. CloseSingleDoor Close a microwave door or a cabinet with a single door. OpenDoubleDoor Open a cabinet with two opposite-facing doors. CloseDoubleDoor Close a cabinet with two opposite-facing doors.

Table 2. RoboCasa evaluation tasks. 

RoboCasa. RoboCasa (Nasiriany et al., 2024) is a large-scale simulation benchmark designed for training generalist robots in realistic household settings, with an emphasis on kitchen environments. It provides 100 tasks in total: 25 atomic tasks with 50 human demonstrations each, and 75 composite tasks with automatically generated demonstrations. The task set covers eight fundamental skills that are essential for home robotics: (1) pick-and-place, (2) door opening and closing, (3) drawer opening and closing, (4) knob turning, (5) lever manipulation, (6) button pressing, (7) insertion, and (8) navigation. The joint action space is 7-dimensional, including end-effector translation, rotation, and gripper control. For our experiments, we exclude the 8 Pick and Place tasks because they are too difficult, and the NavigateKitchen task because it has an incompatible action space, making multi-task training impractical. Table 2 lists each task along with the goal text used for it. Note that TurnSinkSpout, TurnOnStove, and TurnOffStove have dynamic goals that vary on each episode. 14 Fourier Features for Point Cloud Imitation Learning          

> Figure 11. Overview of ManiSkill3 Simulation Environments. Example object-centric manipulation tasks illustrating the diversity of interactions supported by ManiSkill3.
> Table 3. ManiSkill3 evaluation tasks.
> Category Task Description
> Table-Top 2 Finger Gripper PullCube-v1 Pick up the cube and pull it to the target. PushCube-v1 Push the cube into the target. PokeCube-v1 Use the tool to poke the cube until it reaches the target. RollBall-v1 Push the ball to make it roll into the target.

ManiSkill3. ManiSkill3 (Tao et al., 2025) is a large-scale GPU-parallelized simulation benchmark designed for scalable training of embodied agents. It offers diverse object-centric manipulation tasks such as grasping, assembling, and tool use, with support for both imitation and reinforcement learning. Unlike RoboCasa, which emphasizes long-horizon household tasks in visually rich kitchen environments, ManiSkill3 provides highly parallelized simulation and rendering of physics-based interactions, enabling efficient large-scale experimentation and evaluation of manipulation policies. A summary of all ManiSkill3 tasks can be found in Table 3, each representing a distinct skill. 15 Fourier Features for Point Cloud Imitation Learning  

> Table 4. Real world tasks with their goal descriptions.

Task Descriptions 

Drawer put the red cube in the top drawer put the red cube in the bottom drawer Cup-Stacking stack the blue cup in the purple cup stack the orange cup in the red cup stack the red cup in the blue cup stack the yellow cup in the orange cup Arranging put the blue cup in the coffee machine put the orange cup in the coffee machine put the pink bowl in the coffee machine put the red cup in the coffee machine 

Real World. A summary of the real world tasks along with their various goal descriptions can be found in Table 4. 16 Fourier Features for Point Cloud Imitation Learning 

A.2. Architectures PointPatch. The PointPatch encoder (Pang et al., 2022; Yu et al., 2022; Gyenes et al., 2024) divides a given point cloud into overlapping patches, tokenizes each patch and then uses a transformer for token processing. Point features are the Cartesian coordinates relative to the patch center, and are encoded with a lightweight PointNet (Qi et al., 2017b) to create patch tokens. Token position embeddings are computed by passing each centroid position through a two-layer MLP (Pang et al., 2022). We apply Fourier feature projections to the relative patch coordinates as well as the centroid positions. 

PointCloudMatters Encoder. We additionally evaluate the PointCloudMatters-PointNet (PCM) encoder used in Zhu et al. (2024). This architecture is based on the patching paradigm introduced in PointMAE (Pang et al., 2022), but applies a max aggregation across patches, followed by a final projection head to compute a single token for the entire point cloud. In addition, each point is assigned its absolute Cartesian coordinates as well as its relative coordinates within the patch as features. 

DP3 Encoder. Unlike patch-based methods, the DP3 encoder (Ze et al., 2024) creates a single token that embeds information from the entire point cloud. Point features are passed through an MLP, followed by a max-pooling operation to obtain order-invariant global features. A final projection head maps the embedding to the token dimension, resulting in T ∈ R1×D.Although this architecture is simple, it is quite data efficient due to its small number of parameters. Unlike in the authors’ implementation, we do not apply FPS sampling before the encoder since this decreased performance in our experiments. 

PointTransformer Encoder. Inspired by the success of attention-based in methods in vision models, PointTransformer (Zhao et al., 2021) applies attention in a hierarchical manner. PointTransformer blocks augment point features using self-attention between points within a local neighborhood. These local neighborhoods are computed with FPS and KNN. This blocks alternate with down-sampling blocks that reduce the number of points and increase feature size. We use the classification variety, which outputs a single token from the point cloud. Since the node position inputs are used for FPS and KNN queries, we do not modify this input in any way. Instead, we also pass the point positions as the node features, with a Fourier feature projection where applicable. Because of the high compute costs of this architecture, we train each policy on 2-3 tasks instead of the typical 8. 

Pointmap Encoder. To compare against alternative 3D representations, we also evaluate point maps (Wang et al., 2024; Jia et al., 2025a), which contain the same information as point clouds but are arranged in a 2D grid. Given depth images from multiple cameras and their intrinsics and extrinsics parameters, we unproject each pixel into 3D and transform it into the world frame, resulting in a dense point map X ∈ RH×W ×3 for each camera. The resulting 3D representation can be processed directly with convolutional backbones such as ConvNeXt V2 (Woo et al., 2023) or ResNet (He et al., 2015). 

RGB+PointPatch Encoder. Due to the flexible transformer design of our denoising model, multimodal observations can be processed by concatenating tokens from parallel observation encoders. We encode the RGB stream from each camera into a token with a ConvNeXt V2 nano ( ∼15 M parameters) (Woo et al., 2023) that is initialized from a pretrained checkpoint. Point clouds are processed by the PointPatch encoder. 17 Fourier Features for Point Cloud Imitation Learning 

A.3. Hyperparameters  

> Table 5. Summary of select hyperparameters for simulation experiments.

Hyperparameter ManiSkill RoboCasa 

Training Epochs 150 50 Number of Attention Blocks 4 4Attention Heads 4 4Action Chunk Size 10 20 History Length 1 1Embedding Dimension 256 256 Goal Lang Encoder CLIP Resnet-50 CLIP Resnet-50 Attention Dropout 0.3 0.3 Residual Dropout 0.1 0.1 MLP Dropout 0.1 0.1 Optimizer AdamW AdamW Betas [0.9, 0.9] [0.9, 0.9] Learning Rate 1e-4 1e-4 Weight Decay 0.05 0.05 

σmax 80 80 

σmin 0.001 0.001 

σt 0.5 0.5 EMA decay 0.995 0.995 Time steps Exponential Exponential Sampler DDIM DDIM Denoising Steps 10 10 18 Fourier Features for Point Cloud Imitation Learning 

Table 6. Average success rates on different RoboCasa tasks across 5 seeds. Fourier features generally lead to significant improvements for both PointPatch, DP3, and PCM architectures. In contrast, the convolutional PointMap struggles on these tasks, likely due to task complexity and data sparsity. 

PointPatch + FF PointPatch-attn + FF PCM + FF DP3 + FF Category Task Insertion CoffeeServeMug 1.0 ± 2.2 3.1 ± 4.1 1.8 ± 2.6 3.5 ± 2.5 2.7 ± 2.9 5.2 ± 4.0 1.0 ± 2.2 1.5 ± 2.5

CoffeeSetupMug 0.0 ± 0.0 0.7 ± 1.7 0.0 ± 0.0 0.2 ± 1.4 0.0 ± 0.0 0.0 ± 0.0 0.0 ± 0.0 0.0 ± 0.0

Pressing Buttons CoffeePressButton 19 .8 ± 7.0 33 .1 ± 9.3 16 .1 ± 4.3 24 .2 ± 5.4 22 .2 ± 5.4 23 .4 ± 5.4 18 .6 ± 5.8 20 .6 ± 5.4

TurnOnMicrowave 7.8 ± 3.4 33 .5 ± 6.1 9.4 ± 5.0 32 .1 ± 5.5 21 .0 ± 5.4 27 .6 ± 5.2 20 .0 ± 6.0 33 .9 ± 7.3

TurnOffMicrowave 16 .6 ± 5.0 42 .9 ± 7.3 18 .6 ± 7.8 38 .0 ± 5.6 22 .6 ± 5.8 39 .0 ± 5.8 21 .1 ± 6.1 42 .7 ± 8.9

Turning Levers TurnOnSinkFaucet 16 .2 ± 4.6 34 .4 ± 6.4 13 .9 ± 4.1 25 .7 ± 6.7 20 .8 ± 5.2 32 .5 ± 7.5 18 .8 ± 5.2 34 .2 ± 5.8

TurnOffSinkFaucet 28 .0 ± 8.4 62 .8 ± 7.2 35 .2 ± 6.0 54 .4 ± 5.2 52 .2 ± 7.4 54 .4 ± 6.0 37 .2 ± 9.6 61 .0 ± 6.2

TurnSinkSpout 36 .3 ± 6.9 64 .6 ± 7.0 41 .2 ± 5.6 50 .0 ± 5.6 56 .4 ± 5.6 60 .7 ± 6.3 45 .8 ± 7.4 54 .6 ± 6.6

Twisting Knobs TurnOnStove 14 .6 ± 5.4 39 .3 ± 6.7 24 .1 ± 6.3 35 .4 ± 5.8 29 .8 ± 5.0 38 .6 ± 6.6 21 .4 ± 5.8 35 .4 ± 5.8

TurnOffStove 7.9 ± 4.1 20 .4 ± 5.2 12 .2 ± 4.6 19 .7 ± 5.9 15 .1 ± 4.9 17 .6 ± 6.0 9.8 ± 4.2 16 .4 ± 4.0

Open/Close Drawers OpenDrawer 1.3 ± 1.9 11 .7 ± 5.1 3.6 ± 2.4 8.4 ± 4.8 3.4 ± 2.2 11 .1 ± 5.3 3.8 ± 3.0 3.3 ± 3.1

CloseDrawer 33 .9 ± 6.5 71 .5 ± 6.3 38 .6 ± 8.6 62 .1 ± 8.3 23 .8 ± 5.4 57 .2 ± 7.2 27 .6 ± 6.4 53 .2 ± 6.0

Open/Close Doors OpenSingleDoor 0.3 ± 2.1 14 .4 ± 4.9 3.2 ± 3.2 17 .5 ± 6.1 3.7 ± 3.1 11 .9 ± 5.3 0.2 ± 1.4 11 .6 ± 4.8

CloseSingleDoor 24 .8 ± 5.6 58 .1 ± 7.5 19 .6 ± 6.4 57 .0 ± 7.8 13 .6 ± 6.0 56 .7 ± 5.9 6.3 ± 5.3 40 .5 ± 6.5

OpenDoubleDoor 0.0 ± 0.0 17 .4 ± 5.4 0.0 ± 0.0 13 .7 ± 5.5 0.7 ± 1.7 9.8 ± 4.6 0.0 ± 0.0 10 .5 ± 4.3

CloseDoubleDoor 1.5 ± 2.5 33 .0 ± 5.8 18 .0 ± 5.2 34 .0 ± 7.2 15 .6 ± 6.0 34 .2 ± 7.0 3.4 ± 3.0 26 .6 ± 5.4

Overall 13 .2 ± 1.2 33 .9 ± 1.5 16 .0 ± 1.2 29 .8 ± 1.4 19 .0 ± 1.2 30 .1 ± 1.4 14 .8 ± 1.3 27 .9 ± 1.4

PointTransformer + FF PointPatch+RGB + FF PointPatch+RGB (pretrained) + FF PointMap RGB Category Task Insertion CoffeeServeMug 1.4 ± 2.2 3.2 ± 2.8 13 .6 ± 5.2 14 .7 ± 6.1 43 .7 ± 7.5 49 .1 ± 7.7 38 .8 ± 8.4 3.8 ± 3.0

CoffeeSetupMug 0.0 ± 0.0 1.5 ± 2.5 0.2 ± 1.4 1.8 ± 2.6 10 .2 ± 3.8 9.2 ± 4.0 5.5 ± 2.9 0.3 ± 2.1

Pressing Buttons CoffeePressButton 23 .4 ± 5.4 25 .8 ± 5.8 40 .8 ± 8.4 40 .5 ± 8.3 81 .1 ± 7.3 84 .6 ± 7.0 43 .2 ± 8.4 37 .1 ± 6.1

TurnOnMicrowave 18 .8 ± 7.2 33 .5 ± 5.7 26 .0 ± 8.4 33 .6 ± 10 .4 43 .3 ± 7.5 52 .2 ± 11 .0 36 .2 ± 7.8 20 .6 ± 5.8

TurnOffMicrowave 24 .2 ± 5.8 37 .8 ± 6.6 20 .4 ± 5.2 37 .9 ± 14 .7 51 .0 ± 10 .2 52 .0 ± 11 .2 46 .5 ± 6.9 10 .9 ± 4.3

Turning Levers TurnOnSinkFaucet 26 .4 ± 5.6 44 .2 ± 7.4 24 .2 ± 7.0 26 .5 ± 6.7 54 .3 ± 5.7 60 .0 ± 7.2 34 .6 ± 5.4 16 .5 ± 6.3

TurnOffSinkFaucet 55 .9 ± 6.9 59 .0 ± 9.4 29 .4 ± 5.4 37 .2 ± 7.2 44 .6 ± 6.6 55 .9 ± 8.1 46 .2 ± 9.0 22 .1 ± 5.1

TurnSinkSpout 51 .6 ± 7.2 62 .9 ± 7.7 29 .3 ± 9.5 34 .1 ± 5.9 5.0 ± 3.0 7.4 ± 4.2 43 .1 ± 8.5 24 .4 ± 7.2

Twisting Knobs TurnOnStove 33 .6 ± 6.4 37 .4 ± 5.4 13 .6 ± 5.6 13 .6 ± 4.8 19 .5 ± 5.9 22 .4 ± 5.2 18 .9 ± 6.7 10 .1 ± 3.5

TurnOffStove 16 .6 ± 4.6 20 .7 ± 4.9 6.6 ± 3.0 7.7 ± 3.1 10 .3 ± 4.9 13 .3 ± 4.7 11 .7 ± 5.5 4.9 ± 3.1

Open/Close Drawers OpenDrawer 5.8 ± 3.4 15 .6 ± 6.0 7.2 ± 4.0 14 .6 ± 4.6 28 .1 ± 6.7 26 .8 ± 6.8 40 .0 ± 7.2 6.5 ± 3.1

CloseDrawer 57 .6 ± 8.8 57 .0 ± 9.8 49 .8 ± 7.4 54 .5 ± 10 .3 76 .6 ± 5.0 80 .4 ± 5.2 95 .1 ± 2.7 41 .0 ± 7.4

Open/Close Doors OpenSingleDoor 14 .4 ± 4.0 13 .3 ± 5.5 29 .2 ± 6.0 27 .4 ± 8.6 45 .2 ± 7.2 49 .8 ± 5.8 49 .0 ± 7.4 24 .7 ± 5.9

CloseSingleDoor 30 .2 ± 8.2 33 .3 ± 6.3 42 .4 ± 6.8 52 .0 ± 6.8 74 .2 ± 5.4 73 .2 ± 7.2 67 .7 ± 5.5 40 .0 ± 8.4

OpenDoubleDoor 1.9 ± 2.9 6.6 ± 3.8 1.3 ± 1.9 4.9 ± 3.1 61 .9 ± 10 .3 74 .0 ± 14 .8 21 .8 ± 7.0 0.7 ± 1.7

CloseDoubleDoor 5.7 ± 4.3 16 .7 ± 4.5 9.3 ± 5.1 15 .9 ± 5.3 60 .8 ± 7.2 72 .5 ± 9.7 34 .0 ± 7.6 1.2 ± 2.0

Overall 23 .0 ± 1.4 29 .3 ± 1.5 21 .5 ± 1.5 26 .1 ± 1.8 44 .4 ± 1.7 48 .9 ± 1.9 39 .5 ± 1.7 16 .6 ± 1.3

A.4. Simulation Results 

Tables 6 and 7 show per-task success rates for RoboCasa and Maniskill real tasks, respectively. As in Jia et al. (2025a), we test policies at checkpoints after 60% , 80% , and 100% of training epochs ( 30 , 40 , and 50 epochs for RoboCasa, and 90 , 120 ,and 150 epochs for ManiSkill). We perform 50 rollouts on RoboCasa tasks and 100 rollouts on ManiSkill tasks, compute the average success rate and select the best-performing checkpoint for each seed. The final success rate is the mean over 5

random seeds. To compute confidence bounds, we adapt the bootstrapping method from Agarwal et al. (2021) and report the interquartile mean (ICM) and 95% confidence bounds. To simulate one experiment, we sample 5 seeds with replacement. For each checkpoint of each seed, we sample episodes with replacement ( 50 for RoboCasa and 100 for ManiSkill), then select the best checkpoints and recompute the mean success. After repeating this for 50 , 000 simulated experiments, the interquartile mean is the average success after discarding the top and bottom quartiles, while the 95% confidence bounds are the values that 95% of experiments fall between. 19 Fourier Features for Point Cloud Imitation Learning 

Table 7. Average success rates on Maniskill tasks across 5 seeds. Fourier features improve the performance of point-cloud based architectures, likely because they enable better differentiation of fine-grained details. For Maniskill, PointMaps are competitive with approaches enhanced with Fourier features, presumably due to larger training datasets. Bold denotes statistical significance. 

PointPatch + FF PointPatch-attn + FF PCM + FF DP3 + FF Category Task Table-Top 2 Finger Gripper PullCube-v1 51 .4 ± 4.6 57 .1 ± 4.3 46 .8 ± 6.0 52 .9 ± 5.3 77 .3 ± 3.9 78 .8 ± 3.8 80 .0 ± 4.4 78 .3 ± 3.9

PushCube-v1 69 .3 ± 5.3 75 .7 ± 5.7 69 .3 ± 4.5 74 .5 ± 5.1 78 .4 ± 3.8 81 .4 ± 5.4 79 .3 ± 3.1 81 .8 ± 3.4

PokeCube-v1 55 .4 ± 5.4 63 .6 ± 4.2 56 .4 ± 4.2 63 .5 ± 5.9 71 .0 ± 3.6 69 .2 ± 6.6 68 .2 ± 4.0 66 .9 ± 3.7

RollBall-v1 18 .2 ± 5.0 26 .8 ± 4.2 23 .6 ± 3.6 25 .8 ± 4.0 27 .1 ± 4.1 30 .0 ± 4.6 23 .3 ± 3.3 27 .7 ± 4.3

Overall 48 .6 ± 2.5 55 .8 ± 2.3 49 .0 ± 2.3 54 .2 ± 2.5 63 .5 ± 1.9 64 .9 ± 2.6 62 .7 ± 1.8 63 .7 ± 1.9

PointTransformer + FF PointPatch+RGB + FF PointPatch+RGB (pretrained) + FF PointMap RGB Category Task Table-Top 2 Finger Gripper PullCube-v1 57 .5 ± 8.5 63 .9 ± 5.3 75 .4 ± 4.8 74 .5 ± 3.9 82 .7 ± 3.9 80 .6 ± 3.6 71 .7 ± 4.3 74 .3 ± 6.9

PushCube-v1 74 .5 ± 6.7 73 .9 ± 4.1 82 .7 ± 3.1 81 .2 ± 3.0 91 .2 ± 3.0 88 .6 ± 2.6 81 .2 ± 4.2 79 .4 ± 4.0

PokeCube-v1 57 .8 ± 5.0 58 .1 ± 6.3 69 .9 ± 3.7 75 .3 ± 4.3 76 .5 ± 3.9 74 .8 ± 3.8 69 .8 ± 4.4 72 .9 ± 4.9

RollBall-v1 14 .1 ± 6.9 14 .4 ± 4.4 27 .9 ± 4.3 27 .0 ± 3.8 32 .0 ± 5.4 31 .7 ± 4.3 31 .5 ± 4.1 31 .3 ± 5.3

Overall 51 .0 ± 3.3 52 .6 ± 2.5 64 .0 ± 2.0 64 .5 ± 1.8 70 .6 ± 2.0 69 .0 ± 1.7 63 .6 ± 2.1 64 .5 ± 2.6

20 Fourier Features for Point Cloud Imitation Learning 

A.5. Qualitative Results 

Figure 12 shows representative rollouts from PointPatch+FF policies on selected RoboCasa tasks. Overall, the agents trained with Fourier features reliably make contact with the target objects (e.g., buttons and lever handles) and completes all three tasks, whereas the agents trained without Fourier features fail to accomplish the tasks. 21 Fourier Features for Point Cloud Imitation Learning 

Time −→ t = 1 t = 2 t = 3 t = 4 t = 5 

With FF 

W/o FF 

(a) RoboCasa: CoffeePressButton 

With FF 

W/o FF 

(b) RoboCasa: TurnOnMicrowave 

With FF 

W/o FF 

(c) RoboCasa: TurnSinkFaucet Figure 12. Qualitative comparison of PointPatch + FF (upper row) and PointPatch (lower row) policies on three RoboCasa tasks. Policies trained without Fourier features have difficulty learning the demonstration data and carrying out complex movements with precision. Time proceeds from left to right in each row. 

22 Fourier Features for Point Cloud Imitation Learning 

A.6. Real World Results 

Table 8 shows per-task scores for each real world task. In order to arrive at more fine-grained results, we report a task-dependent score rather than a simple success rate, where the maximum score for each task is given in the rightmost column of Table 8. Since policies are very sensitive to the initial scene configuration and the experiments are not blind, it is easy to introduce bias in the results. To minimize this, we employ an alternating testing scheme, where we alternate between rollouts of our method and the baseline. This allows the human operator to ensure a consistent scene configuration for both methods. Table 9 shows additional results collected on the Cup-Stacking task with cups of different sizes. We note that these are results are distinct from those of Table 8, which is why the scores of each method differ between the two tables. However, the policy with Fourier features is still clearly better in both cases.                        

> Table 8. Average scores across 16 rollouts on our four real-world experiments. Adding Fourier features results in significant improvements across all tasks, with the greatest gain seen in the Drawer task.
> Task Demos Per Task Methods with Scores
> RGB + PointPatch (pretrained) + FF Max Drawer 102 0.3125 1.625 4
> Cup-Stacking 80 00.625 2
> Arranging 100 0.3125 1.3125 4
> Folding 75 1.3125 1.6875 3
> Table 9. Average scores across 10 additional rollouts on each pair of cups used in the Cup-Stacking task. The gap between the baseline and the policy with Fourier features widens as cup size decreases. For the smallest cups, neither policy is able to solve this challenging task and the advantage disappears.

Cup Pair Diameter of Smaller/ Bigger Cup (cm) Methods with Scores (out of 2.0) 

RGB + PointPatch (pretrained) + FF Yellow/Orange 7.5/8.0 1.1 1.4

Blue/Purple 6.0/7.0 0.5 1.6

Red/Blue 5.5/6.0 0.5 0.6

Orange/Red 5.0/5.5 0.5 0.4

23 Fourier Features for Point Cloud Imitation Learning 

A.7. Spectral Analysis 

To evaluate the spectral sensitivity of Fourier features, we consider the frequency response of different trained and untrained models with and without Fourier features. Specifically, we consider a random trajectory from the demonstrations for CoffeePressButton in RoboCasa. For each time step, we construct a k-nearest neighbor graph from the input point cloud, and then weight the resulting edges using the Zelnik-Manor product (Zelnik-Manor & Perona, 2004). We compute the eigenvalue decomposition of the Symmetric Normalized Laplacian, of which the eigenvalues typically lie in λ ∈ [0 , 2] 

(Chung, 1997). We utilize a sparse neighborhood of k = 8 to consider the local data manifold (Von Luxburg, 2007), ensuring the Laplacian remains sensitive to high-frequency geometric features. Given this graph and its Laplacian, we transform the input-output gradients onto the resulting graph Fourier basis and plot the model’s response across the spectrum. Figure 8 visualizes the averaged and binned spectrum. We find that Fourier features increase the model’s sensitivity to a wide range of frequencies, including high-frequency signals with λ > 1.0 that are otherwise suppressed by the low-pass bias of standard coordinate inputs. To demonstrate the increase sensitivity to high frequency signals specifically, we consider a simple untrained PointNet consisting of a three-layer MLP followed by global attention pooling and a two-layer output MLP. The PointNet consumes 

1024 randomly sampled points sampled from a unit ball, and we determine the gradient of the sum of all node’s scalar output w.r.t. all input coordinates and average them to obtain a sensitivity of the output w.r.t. the graph input. We repeat this setup for 100 randomly sampled point clouds. This input-output saliency is then projected onto the graph Fourier basis of the symmetric normalized Laplacian using Zelnik-Manor local scaling (Zelnik-Manor & Perona, 2004). Through this decomposition of the saliency into the eigenvectors, we split the total gradient into directional derivatives corresponding to different wavelengths. Due to the use of the Symmetric Normalized Laplacian, the frequency domain is normalized to 

(0 , 2) where the normalized frequency 1 distinguishes between low and high frequencies. Plotting the eigenvalue strength of the saliency for a model with and without Fourier features in Figure 13, we can observe a decrease in sensitivity to low frequency changes and an increase to higher frequencies. Since the saliency map equates to the linear term of a first-order Taylor approximation of the model network, this confirms that adding Fourier features counteracts the spectral bias of the used MLPs. 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 

## Frequency (Eigenvalues [0, 2] )

10 3

10 2

10 1

> Spectral Power

PointPatch 

+ FF   

> Figure 13. Graph Spectral Sensitivity Comparison . We consider a toy problem where we study the point-wise gradient of the sum of model outputs of an untrained PointNet on a point cloud of a sphere. By projecting these gradients onto the basis of a Symmetric Normalized Laplacian constructed with Zelnik-Manor local scaling, we observe that the vanilla architecture (dashed) is inherently biased toward low-frequency geometric components. In contrast, the addition of log-spaced Fourier features (solid line) amplifies the model’s sensitivity to high-frequency manifold details ( λ > 1.0), even before any task-specific training occurs.

24