Memory Retrieval in Visuomotor Policies for
Long-Horizon Robot Control
Rutav Shah1, Yisu Li∗, Femi Bello∗, Yuke Zhu, Roberto Mart´ın-Mart´ın
The University of Texas at Austin
Abstract—General-purpose robots operating in partially ob-
servable environments, such as homes, require memory to sup-
port autonomy. They must recall diverse information from the
past, such as where objects were placed, which tasks a human
partner has completed, and when an appliance was turned on,
to accomplish a wide range of tasks. Achieving this versatility
requires a general memory retrieval mechanism that works
across diverse settings. However, hand-designed and heuristic-
based methods rely on task-specific assumptions that limit their
generalizability. Transformer architectures that use attention
over long contexts for memory retrieval provide a promising
alternative, as they learn retrieval from data rather than relying
on task-specific assumptions. However, directly incorporating
long-context transformer architecture into imitation learning
from offline data introduces two key challenges: (1) the policy
may learn spurious correlations between the past information
and predicted actions, and (2) errors accumulate over time in the
memory due to prediction inaccuracies and their compounding
interactions with the environment, leading to model drift and
cascading failures in long-horizon control. To address both
challenges, we introduce HALO, a visuomotor policy with an
attention-based memory retrieval mechanism for long-horizon
control. First, to suppress spurious correlations, HALO leverages
vision-language model (VLM) priors to steer retrieval toward
task-relevant information. Concretely, it generates task-relevant,
memory-dependent question–answer pairs from demonstration
trajectories and trains the policy jointly with a video question–
answering objective, transferring VLM priors to the visuomotor
policy. Second, to reduce the impact of accumulated errors in
memory during closed-loop control, HALO uses sparse attention
that restricts retrieval to only the most relevant parts of the
history. Together, these components enable more reliable long-
horizon control by guiding the policy to retrieve task-relevant
information from up to eight minutes of past experience. Project
website: robin-lab.cs.utexas.edu/HALO
I. INTRODUCTION
General-purpose robots operating in household environ-
ments must perform long-horizon manipulation tasks that
require recalling information no longer present in current
sensory input. The robot may need to remember where an
object was placed earlier, when an appliance was turned
on, how many pieces of bread were placed in the oven,
or which tasks have already been completed (Fig. 1). Such
requirements arise frequently in everyday household activities,
where successfully completing the task depends on recalling
information over extended time horizons. As a result, purely
reactive visuomotor policies will fail on these tasks, motivating
the need for memory retrieval mechanisms that can leverage
previously gathered information [43, 5].
1 Corresponding author: rutavms@utexas.edu, ∗Equal contribution
Fig. 1.
Memory retrieval in visuomotor policy learning. Long-horizon
household tasks require robots to act on information no longer present in the
current sensory input. Under partial observability, the policy must retrieve
relevant information from past observations stored in memory to predict
correct low-level actions. The type of information needed can change across
task stages, motivating a general, learned retrieval mechanism.
The information that robots must recall from history is
diverse. It may include spatial information such as object
locations, relational information between objects, numerical
quantities, temporal events, or event ordering. Approaches
based on hand-designed memory representations or modality-
specific retrieval rules, therefore, struggle to scale across the
wide range of manipulation tasks required of general-purpose
robots [23, 14, 16]. This motivates the development of a
general memory retrieval mechanism that can be learned end-
to-end, rather than tailored to individual tasks or modali-
ties [41, 19, 20, 25].
Among candidate mechanisms for general memory retrieval,
associative retrieval based on learned query-key similarity,
such as attention in transformers, has emerged as a promising
mechanism [10, 44]. By learning both queries and keys from
data, associative retrieval avoids modality-specific design, and
has demonstrated strong empirical performance in domains
such as language processing [18]. However, directly apply-
ing attention-based memory retrieval to long-horizon robotic
imitation learning via offline data exposes two fundamental
challenges. First, policies may exploit spurious correlations
between past observations and current actions, i.e., attending to
information that correlates with expert behavior in the training
data but is not causally relevant to task execution.
Such
correlations often fail to hold at test time, leading to poor
performance [13, 45]. Second, in offline imitation learning,
small prediction errors compound during closed-loop online
execution [32, 39]. Conditioning on large amounts of past
arXiv:2606.25136v1  [cs.RO]  23 Jun 2026


Visuomotor Policy
Recent Observations
Relational Info.
Past Observation and Actions
Learned Retrieval Module
Action 
Grounding
Knowledge 
Distillation
How many breads 
were in frame 
f1?
Three Breads
Numerical Info.
Long History (~2 mins)
Time when the stove was 
turned on
Fruit was placed on the 
right plate
Spatial Info.
Event-Time Info.
Place all the breadsticks in the microwave and shut the door
Previously observed 
olive oil location
Fig. 2.
HALO learns to retrieve diverse forms of task-relevant information
from history, guided by priors distilled from vision-language models.
observations can amplify this effect, as the policy repeatedly
attends to noisy information, leading to drift and cascading
failures over long horizons. Together, these challenges can
limit the effective use of memory in imitation learning, a
crucial capability for partially observable long-horizon tasks.
To address these challenges, we propose HALO: History-
Aware visuomotor policy for LOng-horizon robotic imitation
learning. HALO enables end-to-end execution of tasks span-
ning up to eight minutes, requiring memory retrieval across the
full duration. Our key insight is that while attention provides a
general retrieval mechanism, it must be guided towards task-
relevant information and constrained to avoid conditioning on
irrelevant or noisy history (Fig. 2).
To mitigate spurious correlations, we build on the observa-
tion that vision-language models (VLMs) encode rich priors
about which information from past observations is relevant
for a task [8]. Although these priors are not grounded in
action and are therefore insufficient on their own for control,
they provide useful signals for identifying task-relevant infor-
mation in history. In HALO, we distill these priors into the
policy through automatically generated video question–answer
(VQA) supervision. To answer these questions correctly, the
retrieval module must attend to specific parts of the history
where task-relevant event(s) occurred, providing direct super-
vision on what should be retrieved from memory. The policy is
co-trained to both imitate expert actions and answer questions
about past observations. The VQA biases memory retrieval to-
wards task-relevant information, whereas the action prediction
objective may still access distinct information needed for low-
level control. This contrasts with prior work that incorporates
VLM priors through text-based summaries [3, 42], which may
omit details needed for control.
To address error accumulation over long horizons, HALO
further restricts the policy to condition only on a sparse subset
of stored information. Concretely, the policy retrieves and
processes only the top-k most informative observations or
actions via learned query-key matching [11]. Unlike prior
works that rely on human priors, such as hand-designed
rules [40] or object-centric representations [16], this sparsifica-
tion is learned end-to-end, potentially offering a more scalable
alternative. By limiting the amount of noisy information in
decision-making, HALO reduces closed-loop drift and miti-
gates cascading failures during execution.
We evaluate our approach on REMEMBENCH [2], a bench-
mark for long-horizon manipulation tasks that require diverse
forms of memory, as well as on five real-world tasks across
two robotic platforms, including a fixed-base manipulator and
a mobile manipulator. Across these settings, we show that
VQA-induced task priors provide a general solution, improv-
ing absolute task success by 7% across diverse tasks and
outperforming prior methods based on hand-designed rules
(−12%) and commonly used task-specific features (−21%).
We further find that while vision-language models encode
informative priors about task-relevant information, policies
that use these priors alone achieve only 18% absolute success,
compared to 41% for HALO, which combines these priors
with action-grounded retrieval. In addition, we demonstrate
that top-k attention sparsification, which reduces model drift,
improves absolute performance by 9%. Together, these results
highlight the importance of learning to retrieve task-relevant
information from memory and grounding retrieval in action
prediction for long-horizon control.
II. RELATED WORK
A. Imitation Learning under Partial Observability
Standard imitation learning assumes Markovian observa-
tions, causing reactive visuomotor policies to fail under partial
observability. Belief-state space methods address this issue
by explicitly modeling task state but require task-specific
representations and update rules [4]. Recent work instead
incorporates explicit memory into policy. Some methods rely
on object-centric representations to reduce the amount of in-
formation from visual inputs, but often limit retrieval to spatial
information [16]. Others selectively retrieve past observations
using similarity in learned semantic embeddings [14, 29],
or rely on hand-designed rules for selectively storing past
observations [40]. Such assumptions restrict their applicability
to settings where task-relevant information is well captured by
a fixed set of representations or retrieval rules, and may not
scale to more diverse long-horizon tasks.
Several approaches learn compact representations of history
to support long-horizon reasoning [17, 36]. While effective,
learned compression can discard granular information, such
as low-level action sequences taken by the robot. These
limitations motivate memory retrieval mechanisms that can
flexibly access diverse task-relevant information from history
without relying on task-specific designs.
B. Knowledge Distillation from Foundation Models
Vision-language foundation models encode rich knowledge
about scenes, objects, and activities from large-scale mul-
timodal data and have been widely used in robotics for
perception, planning, affordance learning, and semantic rea-
soning [37, 38, 1, 22, 30, 34]. Prior work has also distilled
knowledge from foundation models into robotic systems by
improving parametric memory [48, 15]. In contrast, relatively
little work has explored using foundation models to guide


memory retrieval in visuomotor imitation learning, i.e., retriev-
ing information from non-parametric memory [28]. The non-
parametric memory allows capturing episodic details, such as
the location of the fruit or the time the stove was turned on.
Our work builds on these efforts by distilling task-relevant pri-
ors from vision-language models to supervise learned memory
retrieval, while grounding the policy through action imitation.
C. Memory Mechanisms for Long-Context Reasoning
Modeling long-range temporal dependencies is a central
challenge in sequential decision making. Recurrent and state-
space models maintain memory through compressed latent
states but struggle with selective recall and credit assignment
over long horizons [25, 21, 7]. Transformer-based models ad-
dress these limitations by using attention to directly access past
inputs [44]. However, dense attention over long contexts can
cause irrelevant or noisy information to increasingly influence
predictions [26], an issue that is especially pronounced in
robotics due to prediction errors and their compounding effects
during closed-loop execution.
To regulate information flow in long-context models, prior
work has proposed combining attention with recurrence [12],
a gating mechanism [31], and inducing sparsity in the trans-
former architecture [47]. While these mechanisms have been
extensively studied in language and vision, their effectiveness
in long-horizon closed-loop visuomotor control has received
less attention. In this work, we find that simple top-k atten-
tion sparsification is effective for reducing the influence of
accumulated error in model prediction.
III. HALO
A. Problem Formulation and Overview
Problem formulation. In this work, we address long-horizon
robotic imitation learning under partial observability, where
successful task execution requires recalling information no
longer present in the current sensory input. At each time step
t, the robot receives an observation ot (e.g., RGB images and
proprioception) and executes a low-level action at. Let
τt = {(o1, a1), . . . , (ot−1, at−1), ot}
denote the interaction history up to time t. Additionally, we
are given a natural-language task instruction l (e.g., “put all the
bread in the microwave and close the door”), which specifies
the high-level goal and is provided to the policy at every time
step. We are given a dataset of expert demonstrations
D = {τ (i)}N
i=1,
where we collect each trajectory
τ (i) = {(o(i)
1 , a(i)
1 ), . . . , (o(i)
Ti , a(i)
Ti )}
by teleoperating the robot. Our aim is to learn a closed-loop
visuomotor policy
πθ(at | τt, l),
that imitates the expert and performs long-horizon tasks by
retrieving and processing relevant information from history.
Model architecture overview. We parameterize the visuo-
motor policy πθ(at | τt, l) with three main components:
(i) modality-specific encoders consisting of an observation
encoder gobs
θ
and an action encoder gact
θ , which map hetero-
geneous inputs (e.g., RGB images, proprioception, and past
actions) into a common latent space, (ii) a policy backbone
fθ that performs memory retrieval over the encoded history
and processes the information, and (iii) a task-specific head
hact
θ
and htext
θ
that predict low-level control commands and
text answers, respectively.
At time step t, the current observation is encoded as
xt = gobs
θ (ot) and past actions as ei = gact
θ (ai) for i < t.
The encoded history is
Mt = {(x1, e1), . . . , (xt−1, et−1)}.
Given Mt, the current embedding xt, and the task instruction
l, the transformer-based policy backbone fθ produces a latent
state
zt = fθ(Mt, xt, l),
This latent state is passed to two prediction heads: an action
head hact
θ (zt) for control and a text prediction head htext
θ (zt)
for auxiliary supervision.
Method overview. A common approach for retrieving infor-
mation from history is to equip the policy backbone (fθ) with
an associative memory retrieval mechanism, typically imple-
mented via learned query-key similarity (i.e., attention) [44].
Such mechanisms provide a general, modality-agnostic way
to retrieve information from history, avoiding task-specific
designs.
Concretely, the policy backbone fθ implements retrieval
using a query-key-value formulation. At each time step t, a
query vector is computed from the current context,
qt = fq(xt, l),
while each memory element mi ∈Mt is mapped to a key-
value pair,
ki = fk(mi),
vi = fv(mi),
where fq, fk, and fv are learned functions parameterized
by θq ⊂θ, θk ⊂θ, and θv ⊂θ, respectively. Retrieval
is performed by computing similarities between qt and {ki}
and aggregating the corresponding values {vi}. The retrieved
features are integrated with the current representation and
processed by subsequent model layers.
However, as explained before, directly applying such an
attention-based retrieval in long-horizon imitation learning
introduces two key limitations. First, because attention ag-
gregates information from all stored history Mt, the policy
may attend to task-irrelevant details and incorporate them
into decision-making, leading to spurious correlations between
past observations and actions. Second, during closed-loop
execution, small prediction errors, compounded by interactions
with the environment, accumulate over time. These errors
introduce noise into the stored representations, which can


Motor Action
Reducing Model Drift 
via Sparsification
Text Instruction OR
Task Instruction
Robot Trajectory
Text Query
Text Answer
Put all breads 
in microwave
How many breads 
are on coutnertop
Two Breads
Text Query
Past Observation 
and Action
Current
Observation
Text Answers
Generating VQA for 
Knowledge Distillation
Two Breads
Top-K Sparse 
Attention
Query Token
Key-Value Token (s)
Top-k Query-Key Pair
Feedforward
Layer
Retrieval Module
Local Attention
Vision-Language Models
Fig. 3.
Overview. HALO learns a visuomotor policy that retrieves information from the past observations and actions to predict low-level robot actions
(middle), guided by priors from vision-language models to retrieve task-relevant information through VQA (left) and uses sparse attention to reduce model
drift (right).
degrade latent representation quality, leading to model drift
and cascading failures over long horizons.
HALO addresses these limitations with two components
(Fig. 3). First, we distill task-relevant priors from vision-
language models (VLMs) into the policy via generated video
question–answer (VQA) supervision. This supervision encour-
ages the retrieval to focus on task-relevant information, reduc-
ing reliance on irrelevant history (Sec. III-B, III-C). Second,
we restrict retrieval to the top-k most relevant memory entries
at each time step. This sparsification limits the influence
of accumulated error during closed-loop execution, enabling
robust long-horizon control (Sec. III-D).
Concretely, HALO trains a single visuomotor policy that
jointly (i) imitates expert actions and (ii) answers VQA queries
about the trajectory history. Both objectives share the same
modality-specific encoders gθ and a common backbone fθ
that contains the memory retrieval mechanism, differing only
in their prediction heads. Top-k sparsification is applied to
retrieval for both objectives, encouraging the policy to condi-
tion only on a subset of relevant memory entries. This shared
training and policy weights encourage the retrieval mechanism
to learn representations that are useful both for answering
questions about the past and predicting actions. As a result,
supervision from VQA transfers to action prediction, guiding
the policy to retrieve relevant information for the task.
B. Distilling
Vision-Language
Model
Priors
via
Video
Question–Answering
Vision-language models encode rich priors about scenes, ob-
jects, activities, and semantics to understand task instructions,
making them a useful source of guidance for identifying task-
relevant information in trajectories. However, because VLMs
are not grounded in action prediction, these priors alone do
not capture all the information required for effective low-level
control. HALO therefore distills priors from VLMs into the
policy while grounding them through imitation learning.
Video question–answering as retrieval supervision. In stan-
dard end-to-end imitation learning, the retrieval mechanism is
trained solely through the action prediction objective. HALO
additionally supervises the retrieval process using the video
question–answering objective. Specifically, we generate VQA
pairs (u, v), where u is a text-based question probing task-
relevant information from the trajectory history (e.g., object lo-
cations, object relations, event ordering, or subgoal progress),
and v is the corresponding answer. For VQA supervision, the
policy backbone is conditioned on the encoded history Mt,
the current observation embedding xt, and the question u, and
the answer is predicted via a VQA head:
ˆv ∼πvqa
θ (v | Mt, xt, u),
(1)
where πvqa
θ
consists of the shared observation gobs
θ , action
encoder gact
θ , policy backbone fθ (including the retrieval mech-
anism) with the action prediction objective, and a separate text
prediction head htext
θ
.
To answer u, the policy must retrieve the specific infor-
mation from the history that supports the answer. Since the
questions are generated using vision-language models and
tailored to the task, this objective injects task-relevant priors
into the retrieval mechanism, providing direct supervision on
what information should be retrieved.
Joint grounding through imitation learning. While VQA
supervision guides retrieval toward task-relevant information,
it does not by itself ensure that the retrieved information is
sufficient for low-level control. We therefore jointly train the
policy using an imitation learning objective:
LIL(θ) = E(τt,a∗
t )∼D

−log πact
θ (a∗
t | τt, l)

,
(2)
where a∗
t denotes the expert action. We also define a VQA
loss over the generated dataset eD:
LVQA(θ) = E(τt,u,v)∼e
D

−log πvqa
θ (v | τt, u)

.
(3)
The final training objective is
L(θ) = LIL(θ) + λLVQA(θ),
(4)
where λ balances imitation and VQA supervision. This joint
training ensures that VQA provides informative priors about
what information from the history should be retrieved, while
imitation learning grounds retrieval in expert action prediction.


Text Answers
Text Instructions
What activity occurred 
between timesteps t1 and t2?
How many breads were on the 
countertop in frame f1?
Bread was placed in the 
microwave
Score (0-5)
Moving to 
the countertop
Bread 1 [x, y, x, y]
...
Bowl [x, y, x, y]
...
Picking up 
the breadsticks
Activity Summarization
Robot Trajectory
VLM
VLM
Perception Grounding
Grounded Vision Model
Question-Answer Generator (LLM)
Question-Answer Verifier (LLM)
Bread
Bowl
. . . 
VLM
Fig. 4.
Overview of video question-answer generation for knowledge
distillation. Images are first converted to text using a grounded vision model,
and trajectories are summarized with each subtask and corresponding frame
numbers. An LLM generates task-relevant question-answer pairs from these
summaries and the task description, which are then verified for correctness
and relevance, filtering out about 20% of the data.
C. Generating VQA Data from Long-Horizon Trajectories
Generating accurate VQA supervision for long-horizon
robot trajectories is challenging. Single VLM calls over high-
dimensional visual information often produce incorrect or hal-
lucinated question–answer pairs, likely because state-of-the-art
VLMs struggle to process long-context visual information co-
herently. To address this, we employ a multi-stage generation
pipeline that produces high-quality VQA data (Fig. 4).
(i) Trajectory-to-text summarization. Given a trajectory seg-
ment, we construct a textual description that captures scene
elements (e.g., object identities and locations) and activity
descriptions (e.g., “the robot opened the drawer and placed the
mug inside”). To do so, we combine information from different
specialized vision models, such as object detectors for spatial
cues and VLMs for higher-level activity descriptions, and con-
solidate them into a single text representation of the trajectory.
This consolidation is performed only to generate questions and
answers that provide retrieval priors; the information itself may
not be sufficient to capture all the information required by the
policy to predict low-level actions.
(ii) Question and answer synthesis. From the consolidated
text, we synthesize questions that probe memory requirements
relevant to the task. We observe that language models tend
to bias questions toward task-relevant information present in
the initial portion of a trajectory. To mitigate this bias, we
explicitly prompt the language model to generate a question
corresponding to a specific frame index, randomly sampled
from the trajectory. The model is also allowed to return ‘N/A’
if no task-relevant information is present at the specified
frame. We ask the language model to also generate the answer
corresponding to the question.
(iii) Automatic filtering for correctness and relevance. Gen-
erated VQA pairs may contain incorrect or be weakly task-
relevant or labeled as ‘N/A’. To improve data quality, we rate
each pair’s correctness and task relevance using a language
model. Pairs with low scores are filtered out. The remaining
set forms eD, which is used for training.
See Sec. VII-B for generated examples.
D. Reducing Model Drift with Top-k Attention Sparsification
Even with improved retrieval supervision, long-horizon
closed-loop execution remains susceptible to error accumu-
lation. In offline imitation learning, policies are trained on
expert trajectories but must execute actions based on their
own predictions at test time. Small prediction errors can
lead to future observations that deviate from the expected
observations, leading to compounding errors over time. Con-
ditioning on large amounts of information from memory can
further exacerbate this effect by repeatedly incorporating noisy
information, resulting in cascading failures over long horizons.
To mitigate this issue, HALO explicitly limits how much
information from the history the policy can condition on at
each time step. Rather than attending to all available infor-
mation, we first identify the information most relevant to the
current decision and restrict retrieval to only these elements.
This allows the policy to focus on important information while
reducing the effect of accumulated error in memory.
Concretely, let {mi}|Mt|
i=1
denote candidate information ex-
tracted from the history, with keys ki = fk(mi) and values
vi = fv(mi). Given a query qt, standard attention computes
scores si = ⟨qt, ki⟩and forms a weighted sum over all values.
In top-k sparsification, we instead select
Ik = TopK({si}|Mt|
i=1 , k),
(5)
corresponding to the k most relevant elements, and compute
attention only over this subset with all elements outside Ik
receive zero weight:
ct =
X
i∈Ik
exp(si)
P
j∈Ik exp(sj)vi.
(6)
Since the top-k operation is non-differentiable, we employ a
straight-through estimator during training. Intuitively, at each
training step, the policy retrieves the top-k elements based
on the query-key similarity using the current model weights.
If the retrieved information improves action prediction or
VQA accuracy, gradients flowing through the attention output
increase the corresponding query-key similarities, reinforcing
the selection of useful information. Conversely, elements that
do not contribute meaningfully receive weaker updates and are
less likely to be selected in future steps.
To summarize, HALO combines VQA-based distillation
of informative VLM priors, which encourages task-relevant
retrieval and reduces spurious correlations, with top-k sparse
attention, which limits error accumulation and mitigates model
drift, yielding a policy that is effective for long-horizon,
partially observable tasks.


Fig. 5.
Visualization of real-world tasks. We evaluate HALO in four stationary and mobile manipulation tasks, including a human-robot collaborative task
(rows) with strong partial observability, where the agent needs to retrieve different types of information from memory. The pictures in each column depict a
different phase of the task.
IV. EXPERIMENTS
A. Evaluation Tasks.
We evaluate our approach on long-horizon manipulation
tasks that require retrieving diverse information types—spatial,
relational, numerical, and event-time—from past interactions,
including human-robot collaborative scenarios. These tasks
span five scenarios reflecting diverse memory demands often
faced in household settings (Fig. 5):
Retrieve Object (Spatial information). This task requires
recalling object locations observed earlier in the episode; the
policy must fetch a granola bar from a location previously ob-
served on the kitchen countertop, which is no longer visible at
the time of action. Across episodes, the object’s initial location
varies between the left and right sides of the countertop.
Return to Same Container (Object relations). This task
requires recalling earlier relations among objects; after placing
a bowl in a sink, the policy must later place it back on the
plate from which it was originally taken. Across episodes, the
involved objects and their relations vary.
Store N objects (Numerical information). This task requires
recalling a numerical count over time; the robot should place
N chip packets in a drawer before closing it, with the packets
becoming occluded once placed. Across episodes, both the
initial number of chip packets and the target count N vary.
Heat Stove (Event-time information). This task requires recall-
ing when an event occurred to act after a specified duration; the
robot must heat a stove for a fixed duration. Across episodes,
the required heating duration varies between four, six, and
eight minutes.
Store N objects (Spatial information, Human-robot collab-
oration). This task requires tracking a numerical count in a
collaborative setting: a human places some purple cups first,
then the robot completes the total of three purple cups in the
shopping bag, and then adds a green cup to it. Across episodes,
the number of initial purple cups in the scene ranges from three
to four, and the human places one to three cups.
B. Baselines.
With the goal of reducing memory size or introducing
inductive priors about what should be stored, prior work
proposes several alternatives:
SAM2Act++ [16] uses object-centric memory by storing ob-
ject center pixel coordinates. This induces a strong spatial prior
and reduces noise in memory by storing only object locations.
ReMemBer [3] stores text summaries of past observations
generated by a VLM. This introduces semantic priors while
compressing history into text.


TABLE I
EVALUATION ON SIMULATION BENCHMARK WITH 50 ROLLOUTS PER TASK.
Method
Retrieve Object
Return to Same Container
Store N Objects
Heat Stove for T mins.
Average
(Spatial Info.)
(Relational Info.)
(Numerical Info.)
(Event-time Info.)
Standard Transformer
0.26
0.23
0.12
0.27
0.22
SAM2Act++
0.39
0.11
0.27
0.04
0.20
ReMemBer
0.36
0.13
0.21
0.00
0.18
Hand-Designed Features
0.68
0.15
0.21
0.13
0.29
Scene Memory Transformer
0.53
0.25
0.17
0.40
0.34
Token Merging
0.29
0.24
0.25
0.38
0.29
HALO w/o VQA
0.42
0.29
0.17
0.37
0.31
HALO
0.64
0.32
0.26
0.40
0.41
TABLE II
EVALUATION ON REAL-WORLD TASKS WITH 20 ROLLOUTS PER TASK
Method
Retrieve Obj.
Return to Container
Store N Objs.
Heat Stove
Store N Objs.
Average
for T mins.
Human-Robot
(Spatial Info.)
(Relational Info.)
(Numerical Info.)
(Event-time Info.)
Spatial Info.
Standard Transformer
0.40
0.30
0.20
0.40
0.50
0.36
HALO
0.55
0.40
0.55
0.60
0.65
0.55
Hand-designed Features uses human-designed rules to select
which task-relevant features to store or discard, similar to
prior work MemER [40]. It encodes human priors about what
information is important while keeping memory compact.
Scene Memory Transformer (SMT) [17] compresses the
entire history into a single scene-level embedding via attention.
This reduces memory footprint but forces all past information
into a fixed-size representation.
Token Merging [36] compresses the history by merging
tokens with similar embeddings that are temporally adjacent
to maintain a fixed budget of memory.
C. Results
How well does HALO perform compared to prior visuo-
motor imitation learning methods that incorporate alternative
inductive priors? (Table I)
Comparison
to
object-centric
memory.
Compared
to
SAM2Act++, HALO improves average task success by 21%
points. SAM2Act++ performs well when tasks align with its
object-centric prior, such as counting objects, but struggles
with tasks that require non-object-centric memory, particularly
recalling event-time information. This highlights the limitation
of relying on a single type of prior.
Comparison to text-based summarization. HALO outper-
forms ReMemBer by 23% points on average. Text summaries
generated by VLM often capture coarse semantic information,
but may omit details needed for control. Textual summaries
may capture object locations but omit action information for
navigating to the object, explaining poor ‘Retrieve Object’
performance. It suggests that while VLM priors are useful,
text-based compression alone is insufficient for control.
Comparison to hand-designed rule-based filtering. Com-
pared to hand-designed features, HALO achieves an absolute
improvement of 12%. While this performs on par with HALO
on spatial tasks, it remains less competitive than HALO
on other tasks. This suggests that learning what to retrieve
directly from data using HALO not only removes the need
for manually designed task-specific priors but also improves
performance, possibly by enabling the policy to exploit addi-
tional information for decision-making (App. Sec. VII-A).
Comparison to compressed memory representations. We
compare HALO against two approaches that compress history:
Scene Memory Transformer (SMT), which uses a learned
pooled attention layer to compress history into a single em-
bedding, and Token Merging, which merges nearby tokens to
maintain a fixed memory budget. HALO outperforms SMT by
7% and Token Merging by 12% points. While compression
reduces redundancies and noise, it can lose granular informa-
tion necessary for low-level action prediction [35]. In contrast,
HALO stores all information, enabling access to fine-grained
details with selective retrieval to reduce the impact of noise.
Overall, we observe that no single method wins across
all tasks. However, HALO remains competitive without
task-specific assumptions or hand-designed rules, making it
versatile with less engineering effort across information types.
This versatility is reflected in average performance across
tasks, alongside competitive performance on individual ones.
How effective is HALO in real-world tasks? (Table II)
We observe a similar trend in real-world settings, where
HALO consistently outperforms the standard Transformer
baseline by 19%. Notably, this improvement persists on
challenging tasks, including storing multiple objects, tasks
completed by the human partner, and long-horizon tasks like
heating a pot for up to eight minutes, which demand diverse
types of information and long-context memory.
In addition, we measure manipulation and memory failures
in real-world evaluations of the ‘Retrieve Object’ task, finding
that HALO reduces them by 8% and 25% absolute over full


TABLE III
EVALUATION ON SIMULATION WITH 50 ROLLOUTS PER TASK.
Method
Retrieve Object
Return to Container
LSTM
0.14
0.12
Mamba
0.20
0.18
TransformerXL
0.12
0.20
Window Attention
0.13
0.16
Strided Attention
0.20
0.28
Hierarchical Attention
0.28
0.22
Gated Attention
0.45
0.28
HALO
0.64
0.32
attention, respectively. These results support our hypothesis
that HALO reduces model drift (fewer manipulation failures)
and improves memory retrieval (fewer memory failures).
What are the effects of VLM-induced priors and top-
k sparsification on performance? (Table I)
Effect
of
VLM-induced
priors.
We
compare
HALO
against a variant trained without VQA supervision. Adding
VLM-induced priors improves average success by 10%,
suggesting that VQA supervision helps the policy identify
relevant history, particularly for tasks requiring recall of
object placements or numerical information. Without it,
the retrieval mechanism may attend to irrelevant history,
degrading test-time performance.
Effect of top-k sparsification. We compare top-k retrieval to
full attention over memory. Top-k improves performance by
9%. Restricting retrieval reduces the amount of irrelevant or
noisy information incorporated into decision-making, which
is particularly important in long-horizon tasks where only a
few past events are relevant to the current action.
See App. Sec. VII-C and Sec. VII-D for more analysis.
How
does
HALO
compare
to
alternative
sparsification
and memory mechanisms? (Table III)
Comparison to alternative sparsification methods. We
compare
top-k
sparsification
to
window
attention
[11],
strided attention [11], hierarchical attention [6], and gated
attention [31]. Fixed access patterns may miss task-relevant
events occurring at unpredictable times; in contrast, top-
k selects entries based on content relevance, retrieving
information tied to the task rather than position. Empirically,
top-k outperforms an alternative content-based sparsification
method, gated attention by 11% points.
Comparison to non-associative memory mechanisms. We
compare against models that compress history into latent
states, including LSTM [25] (−20%), Mamba [21] (−14%),
and Transformer-XL [12] (−12%). While compressed-state
models summarize past information efficiently, they may
discard details needed for recalling specific past events.
Selective retrieval from explicit memory allows the policy to
access such details when required.
What are the effects of different design choices in HALO?
Number of retrieved entries (k). We ablate the number of
retrieved history entries (k) used by the attention mechanism.
A moderate value (k = 8) achieves the best performance
(52% success). Smaller k (e.g., k = 4, 40% success) omits
useful context, while larger k may incorporate irrelevant
history (48% for k = 12, 33% for k = 16, 44% for k = 24).
Developing adaptive strategies that retrieve only the necessary
amount of information at each step is a promising direction
for future work.
Co-training vs. pretraining. We compare joint co-training
of VQA and action prediction against a two-stage approach
(VQA
pretraining
followed
by
action
finetuning).
Co-
training VQA and action prediction achieves 64% success,
outperforming
pretrain-then-finetune
(44%)
and
no-VQA
training (42%) by 20 and 22 points, respectively. The
minimal gain from separate pretrain-then-finetune compared
to no-VQA suggests that VQA knowledge is lost during
fine-tuning, whereas co-training effectively shapes retrieval
toward task-relevant information.
Stage-wise
VQA
generation
vs.
single
video
prompt
generation. We compare HALO’s stage-wise pipeline against
a single-prompt baseline that generates QA pairs directly
from long videos. HALO achieves 60% points more accurate
QAs and 20% points fewer hallucinations. The results suggest
SOTA VLMs struggle with direct long-video reasoning for
question–answer generation, highlighting the importance of
the proposed stage-wise pipeline for generating high-quality
VQA (Examples in App. Sec. VII-B).
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this work, we study offline imitation learning in partially
observable domains where retrieving information from past
observations and actions is essential to perform the task.
We present HALO, a method for training a visuomotor
policy with a memory-retrieval mechanism for long-horizon
imitation learning. To address spurious correlations learned
during training, HALO co-trains action prediction with VLM-
generated video question–answer supervision to bias retrieval
toward task-relevant information. To mitigate error accumula-
tion from large memory, HALO employs a top-k sparsification
strategy that restricts retrieval to the most relevant parts of
the history. Through comprehensive evaluation in simulation
and real-world experiments across two robotic platforms, we
demonstrate that our approach, which stores all information
in memory and selectively retrieves relevant content, achieves
significant improvements over alternative methods that reduce
memory size through task-specific priors or learned com-
pression. We also find that VLM-induced priors are useful
for selecting task-relevant information from memory, but, by
themselves, can be insufficient for low-level control. In the
future, we plan to investigate mechanisms to switch from fixed
to active querying, adapting to each task. Moreover, we will
explore broadening the scope of querying to cross-episodic in-
formation, using memory to learn from failures. Additionally,
because retrieval from large memory adds retrieval latency,
especially as we expand the context to longer time periods,
we will explore speculative retrieval methods to hide it.


VI. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Huihan Liu, Dvij Kalaria, and Yifeng Zhu for
providing valuable feedback on the manuscript. We also thank
all members of the Robot Perception and Learning Lab and
the Robot Interactive Intelligence Lab at UT Austin for
their insightful discussions. This work was partially supported
by the National Science Foundation (FRR-2145283, EFRI-
2318065), the Office of Naval Research (N0001424-1-2550),
the DARPA TIAMAT program (HR0011-24-90428), and the
Army Research Lab (W911NF-25-1-0065). It was also sup-
ported by the Institute of Information & Communications
Technology Planning & Evaluation (IITP) grant funded by the
Korean Government (MSIT) (No. RS2024-00457882, National
AI Research Lab Project).
REFERENCES
[1] Michael Ahn, Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Yevgen
Chebotar, Omar Cortes, Byron David, Chelsea Finn,
Chuyuan Fu, Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Karol Haus-
man, et al. Do as i can, not as i say: Grounding language
in robotic affordances. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.01691,
2022.
[2] Anonymous.
Scaling short-term memory of visuomo-
tor policies for long-horizon tasks, 2026.
URL https:
//openreview.net/forum?id=5SMNtmJFGa.
[3] Abrar Anwar, John Welsh, Joydeep Biswas, Soha Pouya,
and Yan Chang. Remembr: Building and reasoning over
long-horizon spatio-temporal memory for robot naviga-
tion. In 2025 IEEE International Conference on Robotics
and Automation (ICRA), pages 2838–2845. IEEE, 2025.
[4] Karl Johan ˚Astr¨om. Optimal control of markov processes
with incomplete state information i. Journal of mathe-
matical analysis and applications, 10:174–205, 1965.
[5] Richard C Atkinson and Richard M Shiffrin.
Human
memory: A proposed system and its control processes. In
Psychology of learning and motivation, volume 2, pages
89–195. Elsevier, 1968.
[6] Iz Beltagy, Matthew E Peters, and Arman Cohan. Long-
former: The long-document transformer. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2004.05150, 2020.
[7] Yoshua Bengio and Paolo Frasconi. Credit assignment
through time: Alternatives to backpropagation. Advances
in neural information processing systems, 6, 1993.
[8] S´ebastien Bubeck, Varun Chandrasekaran, Ronen Eldan,
Johannes Gehrke, Eric Horvitz, Ece Kamar, Peter Lee,
Yin Tat Lee, Yuanzhi Li, Scott Lundberg, et al. Sparks
of artificial general intelligence: Early experiments with
gpt-4. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.12712, 2023.
[9] Nicolas Carion, Laura Gustafson, Yuan-Ting Hu, Shoub-
hik Debnath, Ronghang Hu, Didac Suris, Chaitanya
Ryali, Kalyan Vasudev Alwala, Haitham Khedr, Andrew
Huang, et al. Sam 3: Segment anything with concepts.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.16719, 2025.
[10] Gail A Carpenter.
Neural network models for pattern
recognition and associative memory. Neural networks, 2
(4):243–257, 1989.
[11] Rewon Child.
Generating long sequences with sparse
transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.10509, 2019.
[12] Zihang Dai, Zhilin Yang, Yiming Yang, Jaime Carbonell,
Quoc V Le, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov. Transformer-xl:
Attentive language models beyond a fixed-length context.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.02860, 2019.
[13] Pim De Haan, Dinesh Jayaraman, and Sergey Levine.
Causal confusion in imitation learning.
Advances in
neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
[14] Vishnu Sashank Dorbala, Gunnar Sigurdsson, Robinson
Piramuthu, Jesse Thomason, and Gaurav S Sukhatme.
Clip-nav: Using clip for zero-shot vision-and-language
navigation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.16649, 2022.
[15] Danny Driess, Jost Tobias Springenberg, Brian Ichter,
Lili Yu, Adrian Li-Bell, Karl Pertsch, Allen Z Ren,
Homer Walke, Quan Vuong, Lucy Xiaoyang Shi, et al.
Knowledge insulating vision-language-action models:
Train fast, run fast, generalize better.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2505.23705, 2025.
[16] Haoquan Fang, Markus Grotz, Wilbert Pumacay, Yi Ru
Wang, Dieter Fox, Ranjay Krishna, and Jiafei Duan.
Sam2act: Integrating visual foundation model with a
memory architecture for robotic manipulation.
arXiv
preprint arXiv:2501.18564, 2025.
[17] Kuan Fang, Alexander Toshev, Li Fei-Fei, and Silvio
Savarese.
Scene memory transformer for embodied
agents in long-horizon tasks.
In Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition, pages 538–547, 2019.
[18] Luciano Floridi and Massimo Chiriatti. Gpt-3: Its nature,
scope, limits, and consequences. Minds and machines,
30(4):681–694, 2020.
[19] Alex Graves, Greg Wayne, and Ivo Danihelka. Neural
turing machines. arXiv preprint arXiv:1410.5401, 2014.
[20] Alex Graves, Greg Wayne, Malcolm Reynolds, Tim
Harley, Ivo Danihelka, Agnieszka Grabska-Barwi´nska,
Sergio G´omez Colmenarejo, Edward Grefenstette, Tiago
Ramalho, John Agapiou, et al. Hybrid computing using a
neural network with dynamic external memory. Nature,
538(7626):471–476, 2016.
[21] Albert Gu and Tri Dao. Mamba: Linear-time sequence
modeling with selective state spaces. In First conference
on language modeling, 2024.
[22] Jiayuan Gu, Sean Kirmani, Paul Wohlhart, Yao Lu,
Montserrat Gonzalez Arenas, Kanishka Rao, Wenhao Yu,
Chuyuan Fu, Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Zhuo Xu, et al.
Rt-trajectory: Robotic task generalization via hindsight
trajectory sketches.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.01977,
2023.
[23] Sergio Guadarrama, Erik Rodner, Kate Saenko, Ning
Zhang, Ryan Farrell, Jeff Donahue, and Trevor Darrell.
Open-vocabulary object retrieval. In Robotics: science
and systems, volume 2, page 6, 2014.
[24] Yuxin Guo, Siyang Sun, Shuailei Ma, Kecheng Zheng,
Xiaoyi Bao, Shijie Ma, Wei Zou, and Yun Zheng. Cross-
mae: Cross-modality masked autoencoders for region-


aware audio-visual pre-training. In Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, pages 26721–26731, 2024.
[25] Sepp Hochreiter and J¨urgen Schmidhuber. Long short-
term memory.
Neural computation, 9(8):1735–1780,
1997.
[26] Kelly Hong, Anton Troynikov, and Jeff Huber. Context
rot: How increasing input tokens impacts llm perfor-
mance. Technical report, Chroma Research, July 2025.
URL https://research.trychroma.com/context-rot. Techni-
cal Report.
[27] Aaron Hurst, Adam Lerer, Adam P Goucher, Adam
Perelman, Aditya Ramesh, Aidan Clark, AJ Ostrow,
Akila Welihinda, Alan Hayes, Alec Radford, et al. Gpt-
4o system card. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.21276, 2024.
[28] Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio
Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman Goyal, Heinrich
K¨uttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rockt¨aschel,
et al.
Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-
intensive nlp tasks.
Advances in neural information
processing systems, 33:9459–9474, 2020.
[29] Peiqi Liu, Yaswanth Orru, Jay Vakil, Chris Paxton, Nur
Muhammad Mahi Shafiullah, and Lerrel Pinto.
Ok-
robot: What really matters in integrating open-knowledge
models for robotics. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.12202,
2024.
[30] Soroush Nasiriany, Sean Kirmani, Tianli Ding, Laura
Smith, Yuke Zhu, Danny Driess, Dorsa Sadigh, and Ted
Xiao. Rt-affordance: Affordances are versatile intermedi-
ate representations for robot manipulation. In 2025 IEEE
International Conference on Robotics and Automation
(ICRA), pages 8249–8257. IEEE, 2025.
[31] Zihan Qiu, Zekun Wang, Bo Zheng, Zeyu Huang, Kaiyue
Wen, Songlin Yang, Rui Men, Le Yu, Fei Huang, Suozhi
Huang, Dayiheng Liu, Jingren Zhou, and Junyang Lin.
Gated attention for large language models: Non-linearity,
sparsity, and attention-sink-free, 2025. URL https://arxiv.
org/abs/2505.06708.
[32] St´ephane Ross, Geoffrey Gordon, and Drew Bagnell. A
reduction of imitation learning and structured prediction
to no-regret online learning.
In Proceedings of the
fourteenth international conference on artificial intelli-
gence and statistics, pages 627–635. JMLR Workshop
and Conference Proceedings, 2011.
[33] Ramprasaath R Selvaraju, Michael Cogswell, Abhishek
Das, Ramakrishna Vedantam, Devi Parikh, and Dhruv
Batra.
Grad-cam: Visual explanations from deep net-
works via gradient-based localization. In Proceedings of
the IEEE international conference on computer vision,
pages 618–626, 2017.
[34] Rutav Shah, Albert Yu, Yifeng Zhu, Yuke Zhu, and
Roberto Mart´ın-Mart´ın.
Bumble: Unifying reasoning
and acting with vision-language models for building-
wide mobile manipulation. In 2025 IEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pages
13337–13345. IEEE, 2025.
[35] Kele Shao, Keda Tao, Kejia Zhang, Sicheng Feng,
Mu Cai, Yuzhang Shang, Haoxuan You, Can Qin, Yang
Sui, and Huan Wang.
When tokens talk too much:
A survey of multimodal long-context token compres-
sion across images, videos, and audios. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2507.20198, 2025.
[36] Hao Shi, Bin Xie, Yingfei Liu, Lin Sun, Fengrong
Liu, Tiancai Wang, Erjin Zhou, Haoqiang Fan, Xi-
angyu Zhang, and Gao Huang. Memoryvla: Perceptual-
cognitive memory in vision-language-action models for
robotic manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.19236,
2025.
[37] Mohit Shridhar, Lucas Manuelli, and Dieter Fox. Cliport:
What and where pathways for robotic manipulation. In
Conference on robot learning, pages 894–906. PMLR,
2022.
[38] Chan Hee Song, Jiaman Wu, Clayton Washington,
Brian M Sadler, Wei-Lun Chao, and Yu Su.
Llm-
planner: Few-shot grounded planning for embodied
agents with large language models. In Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision,
pages 2998–3009, 2023.
[39] Jonathan Spencer, Sanjiban Choudhury, Arun Venkatra-
man, Brian Ziebart, and J Andrew Bagnell. Feedback in
imitation learning: The three regimes of covariate shift.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.02872, 2021.
[40] Ajay Sridhar, Jennifer Pan, Satvik Sharma, and Chelsea
Finn.
Memer: Scaling up memory for robot control
via experience retrieval, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
2510.20328.
[41] Sainbayar Sukhbaatar, Jason Weston, Rob Fergus, et al.
End-to-end memory networks. Advances in neural infor-
mation processing systems, 28, 2015.
[42] Marcel Torne, Karl Pertsch, Homer Walke, Kyle Vedder,
Suraj Nair, Brian Ichter, Allen Z Ren, Haohuan Wang,
Jiaming Tang, Kyle Stachowicz, et al. Mem: Multi-scale
embodied memory for vision language action models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.03596, 2026.
[43] Endel Tulving et al.
Episodic and semantic memory.
Organization of memory, 1(381-403):1, 1972.
[44] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob
Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz Kaiser,
and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances
in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
[45] Chuan Wen, Jierui Lin, Trevor Darrell, Dinesh Jayara-
man, and Yang Gao. Fighting copycat agents in behav-
ioral cloning from observation histories.
Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:2564–2575,
2020.
[46] An Yang, Anfeng Li, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang,
Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chang Gao, Chen-
gen Huang, Chenxu Lv, et al. Qwen3 technical report.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.09388, 2025.
[47] Manzil
Zaheer,
Guru
Guruganesh,
Kumar
Avinava
Dubey, Joshua Ainslie, Chris Alberti, Santiago Ontanon,
Philip Pham, Anirudh Ravula, Qifan Wang, Li Yang,


et al.
Big bird: Transformers for longer sequences.
Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:
17283–17297, 2020.
[48] Zhongyi Zhou, Yichen Zhu, Minjie Zhu, Junjie Wen,
Ning Liu, Zhiyuan Xu, Weibin Meng, Yaxin Peng,
Chaomin Shen, Feifei Feng, et al.
Chatvla: Unified
multimodal understanding and robot control with vision-
language-action model.
In Proceedings of the 2025
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, pages 5377–5395, 2025.


VII. APPENDIX
A. Qualitative Analysis of Retrieved Information
Qualitative examples are shown in Fig. 6. In the top example
(Retrieve Object), the robot must choose a navigation direction
based on where the target object was observed earlier in the
episode. In the bottom example (Return to Same Container),
the robot must place an object back into the correct container
based on which container it was picked up from previously.
We notice that the policy retrieves heterogeneous and com-
plementary information: for Retrieve Object (top, navigation),
it retrieves both, frames where the target object (olive oil) was
visible and frames from other locations where the target object
is usually found but not currently placed; for Return to Same
Container (bottom, manipulation), it retrieves both past actions
potentially indicating the object’s original container and past
frames indicating subgoal progress (‘picked-up’ vs. ‘placed’).
This behavior goes beyond what simple, human-designed
memory features (e.g., storing only frames where the object
is visible) may capture. Together with the quantitative gains
over hand-designed features (Table I), these qualitative results
suggest that learning what to retrieve directly from data with
HALO is more effective than manually specifying what to
store, particularly for long-horizon, partially observable tasks.
B. Qualitative Visualization of Generated VQA Data
We visualize examples of the generated VQA supervision
used to train retrieval in Fig. 8. The questions probe different
types of information, e.g., object locations, counts, and long-
horizon task progress. These examples demonstrate that the
generated VQA data provides diverse, task-relevant supervi-
sion for guiding memory retrieval.
C. Qualitative Visualization of Spurious Correlations
We provide qualitative visualizations of image regions from
the observation history that most influence the action predic-
tion, following a GradCAM-style method [33]. A comparison
between HALO and the standard Transformer offers qualita-
tive insight into spurious correlations that may influence action
prediction in the absence of VQA supervision.
As shown in Fig. 7, HALO focuses more strongly on task-
relevant target objects (e.g., the olive oil bottle), whereas
the standard Transformer exhibits sensitivity to irrelevant
distractors (e.g., the tissue roll position). Together with the
quantitative results in Table II, these visualizations suggest that
adding VQA supervision reduces reliance on spurious visual
correlations.
D. Quantitative Analysis of Model Drift Errors
Full Attention
Top-K
0.0
2.0
4.0
6.0
8.0
10.0
JSD x 100 (
)
7.40
6.02
Retrieve Oil
To quantify drift from expert behavior, we measure the dis-
tance between the policy’s action distribution during rollouts
and the expert’s action distribution from teleoperated demon-
strations. Both rollouts and expert trajectories are evaluated
from identical initial environment configurations, using privi-
leged resets in simulation to isolate differences attributable to
the learned policy rather than to initial-state variation.
We quantify action distribution drift using the Jensen-
Shannon divergence (JSD), a symmetric and bounded measure
of discrepancy between probability distributions. For each
task, we aggregate actions from rollouts and the correspond-
ing expert demonstrations. Since actions are continuous, we
discretize each action dimension into fixed bins and construct
normalized histograms over the joint action space. We then
compute the total JSD between the flattened rollout and expert
histograms, yielding a single scalar per task that summarizes
overall policy drift: larger values indicate greater deviation
from expert behavior, while smaller values indicate closer
alignment.
Using this metric, we find that incorporating top-k attention
reduces the JSD between rollout and expert action distributions
compared to full attention (0.06 vs. 0.07), indicating reduced
model drift and possibly contributing to a higher success
rate as seen in Table I (‘HALO w/o VQA’ vs. ‘Standard
Transformer’).
Note. We emphasize that JSD is a diagnostic metric and does
not directly determine task success; exact matching of expert
actions may be suboptimal under environment stochasticity.
Nevertheless, reduced JSD provides direct evidence that top-
k sparsification mitigates reduced drift, complementing the
primary performance gains in Table I.
E. Quantitative analysis of the effect of k with context length
N
We hypothesize that the retrieval budget k should depend
on the information required for a decision, rather than on the
context length N. While isolating this in manipulation is non-
trivial, we evaluate on a controlled toy dataset by varying the
minimum bits of information required to make a prediction,
and the context length N. We observe that for fixed N,
performance is similar across k values but varies across tasks
with different information requirements.


Current Observation
Deciding whether to 
go left or right
Frames with Target Object Visible
Frames from Other Possible Site
Retrieved Information Visualization
Deciding whether to 
place left or right
Retrieved Recent Frames
Retrieved Past Actions
Fig. 6.
Qualitative visualization of retrieved memory for two decision points. Left: current observations where the robot must choose a movement direction
based on past information. Right: retrieved frames and action embeddings used for decision-making.
GradCam visualization of images influencing action prediction
Current Observation
HALO
Standard 
Attention
Fig. 7.
Grad-CAM-style visualizations of image regions from history influencing action prediction. Top: HALO focuses on the target object location (top-
rightmost). Bottom: Without VQA supervision (standard Transformer), distractors may spuriously influence the action prediction (e.g., tissue roll position).
F. Implementation Details
Architecture. The observation encoder gobs
θ
consists of a
pretrained, frozen vision model [24] followed by a learned
pooling layer that maps sensory inputs (e.g., RGB and pro-
prioception) to a single embedding. The action encoder gact
θ
embeds past actions using an MLP. The policy backbone fθ
is a Transformer with four layers of local attention with four
heads each and two layers that perform long-horizon retrieval
using top-k attention. The action head hact
θ
is an MLP that
predicts 32 future actions, and the text head htext
θ
is a single
Transformer block that autoregressively predicts answers over
the standard Qwen3 vocabulary [46].
Top-k attention. We maintain an explicit memory buffer Mt
containing 192–3840 entries per episode, depending on the
maximum task horizon. Entries are added to the memory every
eight interaction steps, and each entry stores either per-camera
observation embeddings xi or past action embeddings ei. At
each time step, top-k attention selects k = 8 entries based
on cosine similarity. We use a straight-through estimator to
enable backpropagation through the top-k selection.
Losses and weighting. The overall training objective is L =
LIL + λLVQA, with λ = {0.1, 1.0}. For imitation learning,
actions are optimized using an ℓ1 loss. For VQA, answers are
optimized using a cross-entropy loss.
VQA generation and filtering. Trajectory-to-text summaries
are generated using SAM3 [9] and gpt-4o-mini [27]. For
each trajectory, we randomly sample frame indices to ask a
particular question for and prompt GPT-4o-mini to produce
corresponding (u, v) pairs. Generated pairs are filtered using
gpt-4o [27] as a judge model based on correctness and
relevance. Both the prompts for generation and verification
are provided in Sec. VII-G. The final VQA dataset contains


Fig. 8.
Examples of automatically generated video question–answer pairs across tasks, illustrating different types of task-relevant information required to
answer the queries. We only show four frames uniformly sampled from the video to maintain visual clarity.
20k–30k question–answer pairs per task.
Training details. All models are trained end-to-end using
the hyperparameters listed in Table V, with separate models
for each task.
Evaluation protocol. Policies are evaluated in a closed loop
over 50 episodes per task in simulation and 20 episodes per
task in the real world. We report the final task success rate.
G. Prompts
Please see the bottom of the appendix.


TABLE IV
TASK SETTINGS ACROSS SIMULATION AND REAL-WORLD DOMAINS.
Task Name
Domain
Max Memory
Storage
# Cameras
# Expert
Demos
Retrieve Object
Simulation
196
2
50
Retrieve Object
Real-world
192
1
50
Return to Same Container
Simulation
192
2
50
Return to Same Container
Real-world
192
2
100
Store N Objects
Simulation
768
2
50
Store N Objects
Real-world
768
2
100
Heat Stove for T mins
Simulation
768
2
50
Heat Stove for T mins
Real-world
768
2
60
TABLE V
TRAINING HYPERPARAMETERS.
Config
Value
Optimizer
AdamW
Base learning rate
5 × 10−4
Effective batch size
32
Weight decay
0.01
Warmup epochs
2
Total epochs
200
Early stopping epochs
50
Action prediction horizon
32
Proprioception noise (std)
0.005
Brightness augmentation
Uniform(−0.1, 0.1)
Contrast augmentation
Uniform(0.8, 1.2)


Question–Answer Generation Prompt
You are given a task instruction, task’s description, summary of task events labeled by frame numbers,
and a list of information provided per-frame and per-camera about the visible objects in the
scene, their locations, and robot actions.
You are given a separate list of QUERY-FRAME INDEXES to generate the query and answer.
Your job:
1. Identify events relevant to the task.
Use the task description, and summary of task events to understand the scene in the current episode.
Using these information, describe what plausibly happens in the task for each of the given QUERY-
FRAME INDEXES.
2. Write ONE memory-based query important for the task for each of the given QUERY-FRAME INDEXES
The question must require recalling earlier information provided in the prompt for each of the given
QUERY-FRAME INDEXES. It may include:
- object location seen earlier in the QUERY-FRAME INDEX (e.g., bounding box coordinates, etc.)
- number of objects of a particular type seen earlier in the QUERY-FRAME INDEX (e.g., number of
sponges, etc.)
- few words about the task events achieved upto the QUERY-FRAME INDEX using the provided summary
of task events (e.g., picked two sponges, placed one in sink)
- time-frame of the task events which includes the QUERY-FRAME INDEX (e.g., frame 10 to frame 20)
- important object relations to remember (e.g., object X is to the left of object Y)
Rules (VERY IMPORTANT):
- The answer should be relevant to the provided task instruction and help in solving the task.
- The questions should be about the past events or observations upto the QUERY-FRAME INDEX, not
the future events.
- Include when, what, where, how much, how many, description, etc. in the question, especially
depending on the task demands.
- Questions should NOT include generic references like ’first frame,’ ’last frame’ but rather use
the QUERY-FRAME INDEX provided in the prompt to indicate the frame number in the question.
- Do NOT include questions not used or important for completing the task.
Example 1 (with QUERY-FRAME INDEX: 19), Query: "In the eye-in-hand camera, how many sponges were
there in frame 19?"
Example 2 (with QUERY-FRAME INDEX: 12), Query: "What was the location of the blue sponge in frame 12
in the agent-view camera?"
Example 3 (with QUERY-FRAME INDEX: 38), Query: "Describe the task events up until frame 38 from both
cameras?"
Example 4 (with QUERY-FRAME INDEX: 24), Query: "What was the location all the sponges in frame 24 in
the agent-view camera?"
Example 5 (with QUERY-FRAME INDEX: 13, between frame 10 and frame 20), Query: "When did the robot
pick up the blue sponge?"
3. Answer the query
Provide the single best answer using only the provided information provided for each of the given
QUERY-FRAME INDEXES and your event notes.
The answer should be appropriate for the referenced QUERY-FRAME INDEX and the camera. If there’s no
answer, provide N/A
The answer should be concise using very few words. Make sure if there are multiple answers to the
query, provide all the answers.
Example 1, 2 sponges
Example 2, Bbox: (x_min, y_min, x_max, y_max) (if there are multiple bboxes, provide all the bboxes
separated by a commas)
Example 3, picked one sponge, placed one in trash, picked another sponge
Example 4, Bbox: (x_min, y_min, x_max, y_max), (x_min, y_min, x_max, y_max), ...
Example 5, Frame: 10 to frame 20
OUTPUT FORMAT:
The JSON should contain a single "results" field with a list of dictionaries, each containing the
three required fields for each of the specified QUERY-FRAME INDEX:
json{{
"results": [
{{
"description-of-query": "counting / task-events / location / etc, camera-name",
"query": "<one memory-based question for the first QUERY-FRAME INDEX>",
"answer": "<concise answer grounded in the frames for the first QUERY-FRAME INDEX>"
}},
...
}}
TASK INSTRUCTION: \textit{task_language}
TASK DESCRIPTION: \textit{task_description}


Question-Answer Filtering Prompt
You are evaluating multiple candidate outputs for a single robot episode.
You will be given the SAME EPISODE CONTEXT as in the base prompt:
- A task instruction, task’s detailed description, summary of task events labeled by frame numbers,
and a list of information provided per-frame and per-camera about the visible objects in the scene
, their locations, robot actions, etc.
After the task information, you will also be given a BUNDLE of candidate items to evaluate.
Each candidate item includes:
- id (MUST be an integer)
- ’query’ (a memory-based question),
- ’answer’ (the model’s answer),
Your job (per item):
1) Task alignment: Do query, instruction, and answer all help in solving the task as described in the
task instruction and task description?
2) Grounding: Is the answer specific and consistent with the episode’s referenced frame(s) indices and
camera(s)? Is the answer correct? Verify for both.
3) Memory dependence: Does the query REQUIRE recalling earlier information about the visible objects
in the scene, their locations, robot actions, etc.
4) Instruction quality: Does the instruction briefly prime what to remember?
Answer should be correct for high scores 3--5, both inclusive.
Scoring (integers only, 1--5):
5 = Excellent: query and answer clearly help in solving the task, grounded and answers are correct,
memory-dependent question
4 = Good: query and answer help in solving the task; grounding and answer are correct; partially
memory-dependent question
3 = Fair: query and answer help in solving the task; ground and answer are correct; not memory-
dependent question
2 = Weak: the question-answer pair is not useful to remember for the task (e.g., asking about
distractor objects, not relevant to the task); answer is correct;
1 = Poor: irrelevant to the task; answer is incorrect;
Decision rule:
- If score >= 3 \rightarrow decision = ‘‘keep’’
- If score <= 2 \rightarrow decision = ‘‘skip’’
INPUT FORMAT
You will receive:
1) The task information: a task instruction, task’s detailed description, and a list of information
provided per-frame and per-camera about the visible objects in the scene, their locations, robot
actions, etc.
2) Then a bundle of candidate items:
[
{{
"id": "<integer>",
"query": "<string>",
"answer": "<string>",
}},
...
]
STRICT OUTPUT FORMAT (no prose, no extra fields in the JSON). Mention one entry per ID for each entry
in the candidate items. Do NOT skip any IDs:
json{{
"results": [
{{"reasoning": "<explain briefly why it will be useful to remember for the task>", "id": <integer
>, "score": <integer>, "decision": "keep"|"skip"}},
...
]
}}
Important:
- ’id’ in output MUST match the integer ’id’ from input.
- Base your judgments ONLY on the provided task information (task instruction, task description, and
provided information) and the candidate fields.
- Do NOT include explanations, intermediate notes, or any fields other than id, score, and decision in
the JSON.
TASK INSTRUCTION: {task_language}
TASK DESCRIPTION: {task_description}
