CacheMPC: Certified Cached Model Predictive
Control for Quadruped Locomotion
Nimesh Khandelwal
Dept. of Mech. Engg.
IIT Kanpur
Kanpur, India
nimesh20@iitk.ac.in
Mehul Anand
Dept. of Mat. Sci.
IIT Roorkee
Roorkee, Uttarakhand
mehul a@mt.iitr.ac.in
Shakti S. Gupta
Dept. of Mech. Engg.
IIT Kanpur
Kanpur, India
ssgupta@iitk.ac.in
Mangal Kothari
Dept. of Aerospace Engg.
IIT Kanpur
Kanpur, India
mangalgnc@gmail.com
Abstract—Model Predictive Control (MPC) is the standard
predictive layer in hierarchical quadruped controllers, but the
per-cycle QP solve limits the update rate achievable on embedded
processors. Because legged gaits revisit a bounded region of
state space, MPC solutions admit caching and reuse. This
paper proposes Certified CacheMPC: a Locality-Sensitive-Hashed
cache of horizon contact-force trajectories, partitioned by contact
mode, retrieved at query time and accepted only when an a-
posteriori per-query certificate confirms primal feasibility and
a Lagrangian dual-gap upper bound on cost suboptimality. A
bounded-budget controller schedule combines top-K certified
retrieval, a deadline-bounded QP solve, and a shifted last-certified
fallback. The framework is evaluated on a Unitree Go2 across
2,038 usable cold-controller MuJoCo trials, including a 600-trial
n = 50 campaign at three failure-boundary cells, and a first-
deploy session on the on-robot NVIDIA Orin NX. The un-gated
cache delivers a 25× median solve-time speedup in simulation
and an 18.7× median speedup on hardware. At n = 50 no
statistically significant difference in closed-loop stable rate is
detected between the cache variants and the no-cache baseline
at any tested cell. The certificate’s contribution to closed-loop
safety is not resolvable at the present sample size.
Index Terms—legged robots, model predictive control, look-up
table, locality-sensitive hashing, whole body control
I. INTRODUCTION
Hierarchical control architectures combining a low-rate pre-
dictive controller with a high-rate reactive controller have
emerged as the state of the art for model-based legged lo-
comotion [1]–[3], [16], [17], [29], complementing learning-
based controllers that have demonstrated robust locomotion at
scale [18], [19]. The predictive controller, typically a convex
MPC on a simplified dynamics model, optimises contact forces
over a finite horizon; the reactive controller, typically a Whole-
Body Controller (WBC) [10], [28], uses the full rigid-body
dynamics to produce physically consistent joint torques at high
frequency. The quality of the MPC solution directly affects
tracking and robustness, but the per-cycle solve cost limits
the achievable MPC rate on embedded processors such as
the NVIDIA Orin NX shipped with the Unitree Go2: a state-
dependent contact horizon, larger problem size, or sequential
preprocessing all push the per-tick MPC update into the
M. Kothari was with the Department of Aerospace Engineering, Indian
Institute of Technology Kanpur, Kanpur, India. He is currently with ADASI,
EDGE Group, Abu Dhabi, UAE. This work was performed while he was with
the Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur.
millisecond range, leaving little headroom inside a typical 5 ms
control budget. The MPC is therefore the limiting layer for the
closed-loop update rate.
Several lines of work address this gap. Real-time iteration
NMPC [20], [21] amortises a fresh nonlinear solve over
multiple ticks but still requires solver progress every cycle.
TinyMPC [4] pre-computes ADMM solver factorisations but
requires linearisable dynamics. Neural function approxima-
tion [5] distils MPC solutions into networks but requires
separate training and lacks runtime correctness guarantees;
recent work on safe approximate MPC [23], [24] adds ver-
ification but operates offline. Explicit MPC [6], [22] pre-
computes the solution as a piecewise-affine function of the
state, but the polyhedral region count scales poorly with prob-
lem dimension. Sampling-based predictive controllers such as
MPPI [31] sidestep the QP entirely at the cost of high parallel
compute. The idea of caching and reusing MPC solutions
appears in parametric settings [11], but without per-query
safety guarantees.
This paper proposes Certified CacheMPC. A Locality-
Sensitive-Hashed (LSH) cache, partitioned by contact mode
so that the QP structural pattern is shared within a partition,
returns previously computed contact-force trajectories at query
time. An a-posteriori per-query certificate, evaluated against
the current QP’s own KKT data, produces a Lagrangian dual-
gap quantity Γ( ¯U) that upper-bounds the true suboptimality
∆J = J( ¯U) −J⋆of any accepted retrieval, independent
of where the proposal originated. A bounded-budget con-
troller schedule combines top-K certified retrieval, a deadline-
bounded QP solve, and a shifted last-certified fallback.
The contributions of this paper are:
1) A deterministic per-query QP certificate (Proposition 1)
whose
Lagrangian
dual-gap
quantity
Γ( ¯U)
upper-
bounds the true suboptimality of any feasible cached
proposal independent of its provenance.
2) A bounded-budget controller schedule (Section IV-D)
combining top-K certified retrieval, a deadline-bounded
solver, and a shifted last-certified fallback, exercised
empirically under deliberately tight deadlines in Sec-
tion V-E.
3) A simulation campaign of 2,038 usable cold-controller
trials and a first-deploy hardware session on the Unitree
arXiv:2606.28300v1  [cs.RO]  26 Jun 2026


Go2 with the on-robot NVIDIA Orin NX (Sections V–
VI), characterising the speed, tracking, and failure-
boundary safety of four cache configurations against the
no-cache baseline.
The remainder of the paper is organised as follows. Sec-
tion II reviews related work; Section III states the con-
vex MPC and WBC formulations; Section IV describes the
certified framework and its propositions; Section V reports
the simulation evaluation; Section VI reports the hardware
session; Section VII discusses threats to validity; Section VIII
concludes; Section IX lists future-work directions.
II. RELATED WORK
A. MPC for Quadruped Locomotion
Convex MPC formulations based on the single rigid body
dynamics (SRBD) model have been widely adopted for
quadruped control [1], [2], [16]. These formulations linearise
the rotational dynamics and approximate friction cones as
pyramids to cast the problem as a QP, enabling real-time
solutions using solvers such as qpOASES [8] and HPIPM [9].
Torque-controlled feedback MPC variants [30] and whole-
body trajectory optimisation frameworks [3], [29] extend the
formulation to richer dynamics at the cost of a larger online
problem.
B. Approaches to Accelerate MPC
Explicit MPC [6] pre-computes the optimal control law as
a piecewise affine function of the state by solving a multi-
parametric QP offline. The online evaluation reduces to a
point-location problem in a polyhedral partition of the state
space. While effective for low-dimensional systems, the num-
ber of regions grows exponentially with problem dimension,
making the full enumeration impractical for the 13-state MPC
problems common in quadruped control. Our framework can
be viewed as an online, sample-based variant of explicit MPC:
each cache entry is a local affine piece of the explicit law,
populated lazily from the same QPs that the controller would
have solved anyway, and accepted at query time only when
an a-posteriori certificate vouches for it.
Function approximation methods learn a mapping from state
to MPC solution using supervised learning. MPCNET [5]
trains a neural network on MPC demonstrations and uses
it for online inference. Similarly, iterative learning control
(ILC) approaches [12] maintain a library of control actions
indexed by trajectory phase, achieving faster execution through
lookup rather than optimization. These methods require offline
training or separate optimization stages and are difficult to
adapt online to changing environments.
TinyMPC [4] achieves speedup by pre-computing and
caching matrix factorizations within an ADMM solver, avoid-
ing expensive operations at runtime. While effective for convex
problems with fixed structure, it does not address the broader
question of reusing full MPC solutions across similar states.
Warm-starting is a widely used technique where the solution
from the previous time step initializes the solver for the current
problem. While effective for reducing iteration counts, warm-
starting provides diminishing returns when the state changes
significantly between MPC updates, and still requires running
the solver to completion.
C. Cache-Based and Lookup Approaches
The idea of caching and reusing optimization solutions
has been explored in various control contexts. In [11], a
parameter-adaptive framework stores MPC solutions indexed
by system parameters for fast retrieval. Our approach differs in
that we cache solutions indexed by the full operational state
using LSH, dynamically update the cache during operation,
and exploit the contact-schedule structure specific to legged
locomotion. To the best of our knowledge, CacheMPC is the
first framework to combine LSH-based caching with contact-
schedule partitioning and a per-query optimality certificate for
quadruped MPC.
III. BACKGROUND
A. Convex MPC for Quadruped Locomotion
We use a convex MPC formulation based on the SRBD
model, following [1]. The robot is modeled as a single rigid
body with mass m and rotational inertia Ib ∈R3×3, actuated
by contact forces at the feet. The state vector is defined as
x =

ΘT
pT
ωT
˙pT
g
T ∈R13,
(1)
where Θ ∈R3 is the ZYX Euler angle vector representing the
body orientation, p ∈R3 is the position of the center of mass
(CoM), ω ∈R3 is the angular velocity in the world frame,
˙p ∈R3 is the CoM linear velocity, and g is the gravitational
constant (appended for notational convenience). The control
input is the stacked vector of contact forces:
u =

f T
1
f T
2
f T
3
f T
4
T ∈R12,
(2)
where fi ∈R3 is the ground reaction force at foot i.
The continuous-time dynamics are linearized about the
current state to obtain ˙x = Acx + Bcu, where
Ac =


03
03
Rz(ψ)
03
03×1
03
03
03
I3
03×1
03
03
03
03
03×1
03
03
03
03
ˆg
01×3
01×3
01×3
01×3
0


,
(3)
with Rz(ψ) being the yaw rotation matrix and ˆg
=

0
0
−1
T . The input matrix Bc encodes the mapping from
contact forces to CoM accelerations and angular accelerations
through the moment arms of each foot relative to the CoM.
The dynamics are discretized with timestep ∆t using a zero-
order hold to obtain xk+1 = Axk + Buk.


The MPC problem is formulated over a horizon of N steps
as:
min
u0,...,uN−1
N−1
X
k=0

(xk −xref
k )T Q(xk −xref
k ) + uT
k Ruk

s.t.
xk+1 = Axk + Buk,
|fi,x| ≤µfi,z,
|fi,y| ≤µfi,z,
fz,min ≤fi,z ≤fz,max,
fi,z = 0
if foot i /∈Ck,
(4)
where Q ⪰0 and R ≻0 are the state and control weight
matrices, µ is the friction coefficient, and Ck is the set of feet in
contact at step k, determined by the gait schedule. The friction
cone is linearized as a pyramid with four faces. The resulting
problem is the strictly convex QP (8) and is solved with
HPIPM [9] in production; the formulation is solver-agnostic
and the certificate of Section IV consumes only the assembled
condensed QP data.
a) Fixed-contact horizon.: The per-stage contact set Ck
is held at the current measured contact set C0 for every
k ∈[0, N −1]. The condensed QP (8) therefore reuses one
(Bk, d, d) block at every stage, partitioning by the four-bit
contact mask σ is exact for the QP structure, and contact-
switch anticipation is delegated to the gait scheduler upstream
of the MPC. A horizon-anticipative variant of [1] that con-
sumes a gait-table-driven contact sequence would re-key the
cache on the full (C0, C1, . . . , CN−1) sequence rather than
σ = C0; the certificate of Section IV extends unchanged to
that variant because it operates on the assembled condensed
QP and does not depend on the source of σ.
B. KinoDynamic Whole Body Control
The reactive layer uses a KinoDynamic WBC that operates
at the proprioceptive estimator rate (250 Hz on our build) and
therefore at a higher frequency than the MPC. It consists of
two cascaded stages: a Kinematic WBC (KinWBC) followed
by a Weighted Whole Body Controller (W-WBC), forming the
complete MPC + KinWBC + W-WBC control stack.
The KinWBC modifies the reference joint positions to
better satisfy task-space objectives. Given the current robot
configuration and the desired operational-space motions (base
pose, foot positions), it computes updated joint position ref-
erences using prioritized inverse kinematics, following [2].
This kinematic adjustment ensures that the joint references
are consistent with the desired base and foot motions before
being passed to the dynamic layer.
The W-WBC uses the full rigid-body dynamics (RBD) of
the quadruped to compute joint torques. We adopt the weighted
WBC formulation [10] that minimizes a weighted sum of task
errors subject to the equation of motion:
M(q)¨q + η(q, ˙q) = ST τ + JT
c Fc,
(5)
where q ∈R18 is the generalized coordinate vector, M is the
inertia matrix, η represents Coriolis and gravitational terms,
S is the selection matrix for actuated joints, τ ∈R12 are joint
torques, and Fc are the contact forces.
The WBC optimizes joint accelerations ¨q, joint torques τ,
and contact forces Fc simultaneously:
min
¨q,τ,Fc
X
i
wi∥Ji¨q + ˙Ji ˙q −¨xcmd
i
∥2
+ wτ∥τ∥2 + wf∥Fc −Fref
c ∥2
s.t. Eq. (5),
contact constraints,
(6)
where Ji and ¨xcmd
i
are the Jacobian and commanded ac-
celeration for task i (computed using the KinWBC-adjusted
references), and Fref
c
is the reference contact force from the
MPC. The tracking term ∥Fc −Fref
c ∥2 is the interface through
which the MPC solution—cached or freshly solved—enters
the W-WBC. The W-WBC enforces dynamic consistency with
the full rigid-body dynamics and the friction and unilaterality
constraints that the SRBD model abstracts away, while the
KinWBC reconciles joint references with the realised task-
space motion. The WBC is the final feasibility filter for the
full-body dynamics; the per-query certificate of Section IV
bounds the SRBD-objective gap of any accepted reference by
β( ¯U), leaving model mismatch and full-body feasibility to the
WBC.
IV. CERTIFIED MEMORY-AUGMENTED MPC
A retrieved control is accepted only when an a-posteriori
certificate, evaluated against the current predictive problem’s
own optimality conditions, confirms both primal feasibility
and a budgeted suboptimality bound. The certificate elevates
a cache entry from a heuristic neighbour in feature space to
a verified local piece of the explicit-MPC law. Because the
optimal-control map is piecewise affine with discontinuities at
active-set boundaries, a near neighbour in feature space can lie
in a different critical region; the per-query certificate is what
rules this out. Fig. 1 shows the resulting architecture.
A. Feature Vector and Candidate Generation via LSH
Each cache entry is indexed by a feature vector ϕ ∈R18
that compresses the operationally relevant state:
ϕ =
 ˙pT
˙pT
des
(Brp1)T
· · ·
(Brp4)T T ,
(7)
combining the measured and desired CoM velocities and the
four body-frame foot positions. The cache is partitioned by
contact mode σ so that the QP structure (constraint shape,
active swing/stance bits) is shared within a partition; a trotting
gait, for example, populates only two partitions. Approximate
nearest-neighbour search inside each partition uses Locality-
Sensitive Hashing [7], [25], [26] with the Euclidean p-stable
construction of [25]: L tables of k hash functions ha,b(ϕ) =
⌊(a·ϕ + b)/w⌋, a ∼N(0, I), b ∼U[0, w], giving sub-linear
query time in 18-dimensional space. LSH serves strictly as a
candidate generator; acceptance is decided by the certificate
of Section IV-C.


Certified CacheMPC predictive layer
Reactive layer
state x
mode σ
Feature
ϕ(x)
LSH lookup
Sensitivity correction
¯U=U⋆+K(x−xc)
Cert.
γ ≤ϵ?
Force ref.
Fref
c
KinoDynamic
WBC
joint torque
τ
Partitioned cache (per contact mode σ)
entry {ϕ, xc, U⋆, λ, J⋆, K}
QP solver
fresh U⋆, λ⋆, J⋆, K
Asynchronous refiner
re-tightens stale entries; ABA-safe commits
query
U⋆, K
hit: apply ¯U
miss
apply U⋆
insert
top-γ
commit
Fig. 1.
Certified CacheMPC architecture. The predictive layer hashes ϕ(x) into the contact-mode-partitioned cache and accepts a sensitivity-corrected
candidate ¯U only when ρfeas and the dual-gap Γ( ¯U) satisfy the budget β( ¯U); on rejection the QP is solved and the fresh tuple is inserted. An asynchronous
refiner re-tightens stale entries, and the accepted Fref
c
is consumed by the KinoDynamic WBC.
B. Condensed Problem and Cache Entry Schema
After eliminating the predicted states via the linearised
dynamics of Section III-A, the convex MPC at state x and
contact mode σ is the strictly convex QP
min
U
1
2U⊤H U + g⊤U
s.t.
d ≤C U ≤d,
(8)
where U ∈Rn stacks the horizon contact forces, H ≻0 (reg-
ularised by the controller), and (C, d, d) collect the linearised
friction pyramid, fz bounds, and contact-activation constraints.
Let J(U; x) = 1
2U⊤HU + g⊤U with constrained optimum
J⋆. Each cache entry stores (ϕ, xc, U⋆, λℓ, λu, J⋆, K), where
(λℓ, λu) ≥0 are the dual multipliers of the two sides of
(8), and K = ∂U⋆/∂x is the active-set sensitivity from the
entry’s KKT system. For the SRBD formulation (C, d, d)
depend on the contact mode but not on the state, so a cached
control feasible at insertion stays feasible for every query in
the same partition; only suboptimality must be bounded. State-
dependent constraint terms restore a non-trivial feasibility
component in the certificate below.
C. Per-Query Certificate
Given a candidate control ¯U (retrieved, possibly sensitivity-
corrected) the certificate returns two quantities.
a) Primal feasibility.: The exact violation is
ρfeas( ¯U) = max
i
max

di−(C ¯U)i, (C ¯U)i−di, 0

,
(9)
computed in one matrix–vector product.
b) Dual-gap bound on suboptimality.: The Lagrangian
dual of (8) at any λℓ, λu ≥0 is, with s = g + C⊤(λu −λℓ),
q(λℓ, λu) = −1
2s⊤H−1s −λ⊤
ud + λ⊤
ℓd,
(10)
and by weak duality q ≤J⋆. Hence for any feasible ¯U,
Γ( ¯U) = J( ¯U; x) −q(λℓ, λu)
≥J( ¯U; x) −J⋆= ∆J( ¯U) ≥0
(11)
is a rigorous upper bound on the true suboptimality ∆J of
¯U. Throughout the paper ∆J denotes the true gap and Γ the
certificate’s upper-bound quantity. Evaluating (10) costs one
Cholesky factorisation of H and a back-substitution. The re-
ported implementation evaluates Γ at λ=0 (the unconstrained
relaxation q = −1
2g⊤H−1g), which is the loosest valid weak-
duality bound. A cached-dual variant of the bound would be
tight whenever the query shared the entry’s active set.
c) Acceptance rule.: Define the per-query relative budget
β( ¯U) = ϵabs + ϵrel |J( ¯U)|.
(12)
The cached candidate is accepted iff
ρfeas( ¯U) ≤ϵfeas and Γ( ¯U) ≤β( ¯U),
(13)
otherwise the QP is solved online and the new (U⋆, λ⋆, J⋆, K)
tuple is inserted. The budget β is state-dependent through
|J( ¯U)|; a per-tick constant guarantee requires an operating
tube with an upper bound Jmax on |J|, giving β ≤βmax =
ϵabs + ϵrelJmax.
d) Dual-feasibility validation.: The bound (10) requires
λℓ, λu ≥0 and finite. Because the reported implementation
evaluates Γ at λ=0, dual-feasibility is satisfied by construc-
tion. Any cached-dual variant of the bound would need to
guard the reused multipliers for finiteness and non-negativity
and fall back to λ = 0 on failure, so that the bound the
controller acts on is always weak-duality-valid.
Proposition 1 (Deterministic per-query QP certificate). Let
(8) be the current QP with H ≻0 and optimum J⋆. Assume
¯U is feasible for (8), i.e. d ≤C ¯U ≤d. Then for any finite,
dual-feasible (λℓ, λu)≥0 the dual-gap quantity Γ( ¯U) defined
in (11) satisfies
∆J( ¯U) = J( ¯U; x) −J⋆≤Γ( ¯U).
If, in addition, the acceptance rule (13) succeeds, then
∆J( ¯U) ≤β( ¯U).
Proof. Feasibility of ¯U gives J⋆≤J( ¯U); weak duality at
any dual-feasible (λℓ, λu) gives q ≤J⋆. Subtracting yields
∆J = J( ¯U) −J⋆≤J( ¯U) −q = Γ, and the acceptance rule
(13) enforces Γ ≤β.


The implementation accepts ρfeas ≤ϵfeas with ϵfeas = 10−4,
three orders of magnitude below the smallest constraint scale;
this is a numerical tolerance for round-off in ρfeas evalua-
tion rather than a relaxation of feasibility in Proposition 1.
Proposition 1 also makes no reference to the source of ¯U or
(λℓ, λu): the bound is valid whether the proposal is obtained
by approximate nearest-neighbour search, drawn from an
offline dictionary, asynchronously refined, or constructed by
sensitivity-corrected affine extrapolation.
Proposition 2 (Retrieval safety is independent of approxi-
mate nearest-neighbour search). Suppose the controller ap-
plies a cached proposal ¯U only after the acceptance rule
(13) succeeds with ρfeas( ¯U) = 0 (exact feasibility), and
otherwise solves (8) exactly. Then for any retrieval policy —
including one that returns an arbitrary proposal, returns no
proposal, or returns one that violates the cached entry’s active-
set assumptions — every applied control Uapplied satisfies
∆J(Uapplied) ≤β(Uapplied).
Proof. If the acceptance rule (13) succeeds with ρfeas( ¯U) = 0,
Proposition 1 gives ∆J( ¯U) ≤β( ¯U); otherwise the controller
applies the QP optimum U⋆, for which ∆J = 0.
The numerical feasibility tolerance ϵfeas inherits the same
caveat as Proposition 1. Approximate-nearest-neighbour errors
therefore reduce the cache hit rate but cannot compromise
acceptance correctness; the same statement covers stale refiner
entries, sensitivity-corrected proposals whose linearisation has
crossed an active-set boundary, and discovered proposals
whose anchor was sampled offline.
D. Bounded-Budget Controller Schedule
The controller enforces a deterministic schedule at every
MPC tick. Let the tick budget Ttotal be partitioned as Ttotal =
Tcache + Tsolve + Tfallback:
1) Within Tcache, attempt certified retrieval over the top-K
LSH candidates; if any candidate ¯U satisfies (13), apply
it and return.
2) Within Tsolve, solve the QP (8); if the solver returns
within budget, apply U⋆and insert into the cache.
3) If the deadline is missed, apply a shifted last-certified
feasible sequence.
The controller executes this schedule at every tick. Section V-E
reports an empirical stress trial under deliberately tight dead-
lines. In nominal MPC the analogue of step (3) is absent: a
solver that exceeds its deadline leaves the controller without
a defined action.
E. Sensitivity-Augmented Retrieval and Active-Set Filtering
A cache entry computed at anchor state xc can be upgraded
from a constant proposal to a first-order affine proposal via the
stored sensitivity:
¯U(x) = U⋆+ K (x −xc).
(14)
Scope. (14) is exact only when the query parameter θ =
(x, xg, rp, σ, µ, . . . ) varies along x alone, with reference xg,
foot positions rp, contact mode σ, and model parameters held
at the anchor’s values. In the present quadruped use-case the
actual cache neighbourhood varies along all of these axes
simultaneously, so (14) is a first-order proposal heuristic, not
an exact piece of the explicit-MPC law. Proposition 1 is what
makes its use safe: the certificate is evaluated on the corrected
candidate, and the candidate is applied only if the certificate
succeeds. Errors in the linearisation (missing ∂/∂xg, ∂/∂rp,
∂/∂σ terms) reduce hit rate but cannot compromise the bound.
a) Active-set region filter.: The cached duals (λℓ, λu)
identify the entry’s active set. As a hit-quality pre-screen, the
candidate ¯U is rejected when its binding/non-binding pattern
is inconsistent with the cached one within a cert-region band
of 25 N. This filter is not required for Proposition 1 and does
not represent exact membership in a critical region; it costs
one matrix–vector product against C per query, and avoids the
Cholesky in (10) for proposals that would fail (13) anyway.
The region filter is enabled in the production configuration.
F. Certified Online Execution
Algorithm
1
summarises
the
certified
retrieval.
The
condensed-QP data (H, g, C, d, d) is assembled once per tick
because the certificate consumes it; this is the only online cost
shared between the hit and miss paths. The hit path addition-
ally pays the certificate cost (one Cholesky of H, one back-
substitution, and an O(n) primal-cost evaluation) and skips the
QP solve. An asynchronous refiner re-optimises entries with
the largest Γ values under a monotone-improvement invariant
and runs off the real-time hit/miss path; the per-step guarantee
remains the certificate of (13). Cache entries are serialised to
disk on shutdown so subsequent sessions start populated.
G. Stability Considerations
The classical suboptimal-MPC analysis [14], [15] estab-
lishes Lyapunov decrease towards an equilibrium under the
standard nominal-MPC assumptions [33]; robust extensions
under bounded disturbance [32] give input-to-state stability
rather than asymptotic convergence. Periodic locomotion vio-
lates two of those assumptions: the closed-loop attractor is a
phase-parameterised orbit rather than a point, and the applied
torque passes through a WBC projection layer that the MPC
does not model. A formal practical-orbital stability theorem
under the per-query budget β( ¯U) of (12) would require a
phase-conditioned value function, recursive feasibility under
contact-mode switches, a strong-convexity conversion from
cost gap to control deviation (scaling as
p
β/σmin(H) rather
than linearly in β), and a disturbance model that subsumes
WBC projection error, SRBD–plant mismatch, and state-
estimator error.
Within the present paper the certificate plays an operational
role: it bounds the per-query cost gap by β( ¯U) exactly
when (13) succeeds, and the proposal mechanism (cache,
refiner, sensitivity correction) maximises the rate at which the
controller stays inside the certified regime. The KinoDynamic
WBC is the final feasibility filter for the full rigid-body
dynamics and absorbs part of the residual model mismatch.


Algorithm 1 Certified CacheMPC Retrieval
Require: state x, contact mode σ, cache H, tolerances
(ϵfeas, ϵabs, ϵrel)
Ensure: force reference Fref
c
1: ϕ←Φ(x); select partition Hσ
2: N ←LSH-TopK(Hσ, ϕ, K) {up to K neighbour entries,
sorted by ∥ϕ −ϕj∥}
3: assemble (H, g, C, d, d) {condense; no solve}
4: accept←FALSE
5: for all (U⋆
j, λj, Kj, xc,j) ∈N in order, while in Tcache
budget do
6:
¯U←U⋆
j + Kj(x −xc,j) {sensitivity correction}
7:
if region-filter active set of λj inconsistent with C ¯U
vs. d, d then
8:
continue {region-filter reject; try next candidate}
9:
end if
10:
(ρfeas, Γ)
←
Certificate(H, g, C, d, d, ¯U, λ
=
0)
{production uses λ=0; cached duals stored for future
tighter bound}
11:
β ←ϵabs + ϵrel|J( ¯U)|
12:
if ρfeas ≤ϵfeas and Γ≤β then
13:
accept←TRUE; break
14:
end if
15: end for
16: if accept then
17:
Fref
c ←¯U {certified hit}
18: else
19:
(U⋆, λ⋆, J⋆, K⋆)←SolveMPC(x, σ)
20:
insert into Hσ; Fref
c ←U⋆
21: end if
22: forward Fref
c
to the KinoDynamic WBC
V. EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
A. Experimental Setup
We evaluate CacheMPC on the Unitree Go2 quadruped
robot in MuJoCo [13]. The convex predictive backend uses
an SRBD model with horizon N = 5 at ∆t = 50 ms
(T = 0.25 s); the WBC runs at the proprioceptive estimator
rate (250 Hz). Friction coefficient µ = 0.3 and per-foot
normal-force bounds 0 ≤fz,i ≤150 N (the lower bound
is set to 0 in the production configuration so that swing feet
with fi,z = 0 remain feasible). The LSH index uses L = 35
tables of k = 5 hash functions each, bucket width w ∝r for
an acceptance radius r = 0.20. The feature vector ϕ ∈R18
matches (7): ϕ = [ ˙p⊤
B | ˙p⊤
des,B | (Brp1)⊤| · · · | (Brp4)⊤]⊤,
with both velocities and foot positions expressed in the body
frame; the desired CoM linear velocity is rotated into the body
frame and concatenated with the desired yaw rate. Body-frame
bucketing makes the index SE(2)-invariant.
a) Compute platforms.: Timing in Section V is reported
on the development workstation (P-W). The on-robot plat-
form (P-O), used in Section VI, is the NVIDIA Orin NX
16 GB module shipped on the Go2; the ARM64 Orin NX
is approximately 3–5× slower than the P-W workstation on
the inner QP solve and on Eigen-heavy assembly code. Per-
stage breakdowns are wall-clock measurements taken inside
the controller covering the entire MPC update call.
We
evaluate
four
cache
configurations
on
each
of
two downstream architectures. Each configuration is fully
specified by three caching flags in the production con-
troller’s YAML configuration; Table I lists the runtime
values of use_certificate, use_sensitivity, and
use_region_filter. The region-filter flag defaults to
true in the C++ controller, so Cache-Cert retains the region
filter even when its YAML override is absent. Convex disables
caching entirely.
TABLE I
CACHE CONFIGURATIONS AND THEIR THREE RUNTIME FLAGS.
Configuration
Certificate
Sensitivity
Region filter
Convex (no cache)
—
—
—
Cache-NoCert
off
off
off
Cache-Cert
on
off
on
Cache-Full
on
on
on
The downstream architectures are (a) WBC, the KinoDy-
namic Whole-Body Controller of Section III-B that consumes
the MPC’s contact-force reference, and (b) MRT, a model-
reference-tracking controller that maps the MPC’s contact
forces to joint torques directly via τ = −J⊤
aaFc with a swing-
leg foot impedance term, removing the WBC’s full-dynamics
projection so that the MPC reference reaches joint torque
without an absorption layer.
Trials are run on a cold-controller IID protocol: one fresh
controller spawn per trial, paired pseudo-random seeds, and
a cache file that is wiped at trial start. The simulation
evaluation comprises four exploratory campaigns covering
the eight (configuration, architecture) cells across velocity-
sweep trot, a push ladder from 10 to 100 N, and three terrain
scenarios (two stair heights and a 15◦slope). Inspection of
the exploratory n = 15 data identified three failure-boundary
cells with the largest apparent cache-vs-no-cache separation;
these cells were prospectively specified and then re-powered
to n=50 with fresh seeds in a 600-trial campaign. Combined
with the exploratory campaigns, the full evaluation comprises
2,038 usable cold-controller trials (1,438 exploratory after two
high-push convex trials were lost to a controller startup failure
unrelated to caching, plus 600 re-power). A per-cell anomaly
scanner taints trials emitting controller anomalies, NaN/Inf
streams, or RMSE values above physically reasonable caps;
all cells reported pass these checks. Per-campaign tabulations
are provided in the supplementary material.
b) Hit-rate metrics.: The paper reports three hit-rate
quantities, each labelled in context. The raw LSH-neighbour
hit rate is the fraction of MPC ticks for which the LSH index
returns at least one candidate within bucket width w. The
certified-acceptance rate is the fraction for which a returned
candidate additionally satisfies the certificate budget (13). The
controller hit-path rate is the fraction for which the controller
takes the cache-hit code path (no QP solve); it equals the


certified-acceptance rate when the certificate is on, and the
raw LSH-neighbour rate for Cache-NoCert.
c) Production tolerances.: The condensed Hessian is
regularised with wqp = 10−2, preserving weak duality. The
certificate is evaluated with λ = 0 throughout. Certificate
tolerances are ϵabs = 5.0, ϵrel = 0.5, ϵfeas = 10−4, with a
cert-region band of 25 N. Base proportional gains for (x, y, ψ)
are zero because their references are velocity-integrated. Per-
trial logged |J( ¯U)| values lie in [10, 250], giving β ∈[10, 130]
across the trot scenario.
B. Solution Retrieval Time
Per-tick MPC update times on the trot scenario, summarised
across n = 15 cold-controller trials per cell on the WBC
architecture, are reported in Table II. Speedups are per-trial
p50 ratios against the matched-seed Convex baseline.
TABLE II
PER-TICK MPC UPDATE TIME ON THE TROT SCENARIO, n=15 TRIALS
PER CELL. ENTRIES ARE THE ACROSS-TRIAL MEDIAN IN MICROSECONDS.
Configuration
Mean
p50
p95
p99
Speedup
Convex
759
711
1086
1758
—
Cache-NoCert
184
28
1522
2281
25.4×
Cache-Cert
842
198
2213
3048
3.6×
Cache-Full
865
207
2105
2956
3.4×
The un-gated cache attains the largest median speedup
because its hit path skips both the certificate evaluation and the
QP solve, reducing to an LSH lookup followed by the apply
step. The cert-gated variants pay the certificate cost (Cholesky
on H plus the dual-gap evaluation) on every tick and plateau
at a moderate median speedup; their mean and tail are inflated
by certificate-rejected misses that pay both the certificate and
the QP solve. The per-trial p50 distributions for the cache
variants are non-overlapping with the Convex baseline across
the campaign. Hit-rate curves are shown in Fig. 2.
0
10
20
30
40
time within trot (s)
0
20
40
60
80
100
cumulative cache hit rate (%)
Convex (no cache)
Cache-NoCert
Cache-Cert
Cache-Full
Fig. 2.
Cumulative cache hit rate over time within trot, n = 15 trials.
Faint traces are per-trial curves; bold lines are per-variant means. The Cache-
NoCert plateau is the raw LSH-neighbour rate; the Cache-Cert and Cache-Full
plateaus are the certified-acceptance rate.
C. Locomotion Performance
Tracking performance during the trot velocity sweep (0–
0.6 m/s) is summarised in Table III. Per-trial vx, vy, and
combined velocity RMSE were aggregated across n = 15
matched-seed trials per configuration.
TABLE III
TRACKING RMSE ON THE 0–0.6 M/S TROT VELOCITY SWEEP, n=15
TRIALS PER CELL. ALL RMSE VALUES IN M/S.
Configuration
vx RMSE
vy RMSE
Vel RMSE
Stable
Convex (no cache)
0.116
0.067
0.098
15/15
Cache-NoCert
0.131
0.080
0.112
15/15
Cache-Cert
0.113
0.076
0.098
15/15
Cache-Full
0.133
0.067
0.110
15/15
All four cache configurations track within ±14% of the
matched-seed Convex baseline on velocity RMSE, the trial-
to-trial spread overlaps across cells, and no trial produced
a fall. Position RMSE varies widely across cells (bootstrap
CI 0.6–1.2 m) because the base-frame proportional gains for
(x, y, ψ) are zero in the production configuration and position
drifts under velocity-integrated references; velocity RMSE is
therefore the discriminating tracking metric.
D. Failure-Boundary Safety at n=50
Closed-loop safety is characterised by whether the cache
changes the stable rate at conditions that push the no-cache
baseline to fail. The exploratory campaigns bracket two failure
boundaries (WBC architecture between 80 and 100 N of lateral
push; MRT architecture between 50 and 60 N, with an addi-
tional terrain failure at the 10 cm step height). The three cells
with the largest apparent cache-vs-no-cache separation in the
exploratory data were prospectively specified and re-powered
to n=50 with fresh seeds; Table IV reports the result.
TABLE IV
FAILURE-BOUNDARY STABLE RATE PER CONFIGURATION, n=50 TRIALS
PER CELL. FISHER p-VALUES ARE AGAINST THE NO-CACHE BASELINE OF
THE SAME CELL AND ARE UNCORRECTED; THE HOLM–BONFERRONI
THRESHOLD OVER THE 12 COMPARISONS IS α/12≈0.0042, SO THE BOLD
ENTRY IS NOT CORRECTED-SIGNIFICANT.
Cell
Configuration
Stable
Rate
Fisher p
WBC, 80 N lateral push
Convex (no cache)
19/50
38%
—
Cache-NoCert
28/50
56%
0.109
Cache-Cert
24/50
48%
0.419
Cache-Full
31/50
62%
0.027
MRT, 50 N lateral push
Convex
10/50
20%
—
Cache-NoCert
9/50
18%
1.000
Cache-Cert
7/50
14%
0.595
Cache-Full
6/50
12%
0.414
MRT, 10 cm step traversal
Convex
43/50
86%
—
Cache-NoCert
44/50
88%
1.000
Cache-Cert
43/50
86%
1.000
Cache-Full
46/50
92%
0.525


WBC
+ push 80 N
MRT
+ push 50 N
MRT
+ steps 10 cm
0
20
40
60
80
100
stable rate (%, n = 50)
38
20
86
56
18
88
48
14
86
62
12
92
p = 0.027
no cache
NoCert
Cert
Full
Fig. 3.
Failure-boundary stable rate, n = 50 trials per cell, at three
prospectively specified cells. The annotated p=0.027 (Cache-Full vs. Convex
on the WBC 80 N cell) is the only within-cell comparison below 0.05 and
is uncorrected; it does not survive Holm–Bonferroni over the 12-comparison
family.
No comparison between any cache variant and the no-
cache baseline survives Holm–Bonferroni correction over the
12 cell–variant comparisons at n=50. The largest within-cell
separation in the table is descriptive only.
The operational statement supported by the data is that
caching without a per-query gate does not measurably harm
closed-loop stability at the failure boundaries tested. The
certificate’s runtime safety contribution is masked at this
sample size by the downstream architecture — the WBC’s full-
dynamics projection and joint-level proportional-derivative
loop on one side, the foot-impedance term on the MRT side.
At the matched 10 N exploratory cell, all four configurations
survive every trial and the per-trial vy RMSE distributions
overlap.
E. Bounded-Budget Stress Test
The schedule of Section IV-D was exercised under deliber-
ately tight deadlines on a single 45 s trot trial. Table V reports
the outcome.
TABLE V
STRESS TRIAL UNDER TIGHT DEADLINES ON 45 S OF TROT. SCHEDULE
PARAMETERS: K =3, Tcache =200 µS, Tsolve =2000 µS. THE
CLOSED-LOOP VELOCITY RMSE IS REPORTED AGAINST A
MATCHED-SEED UNSTRESSED TRIAL.
Quantity
Value
Controller ticks (TROT)
2239
Cache-budget exhausts (fall to QP solve)
469
Solver-deadline overruns (fall to shifted fallback)
56
Total deadline-fallback ticks
525 (23.4%)
Vel RMSE (this trial)
0.079 m/s
Vel RMSE (matched unstressed trial)
0.078 m/s
Fall?
no
The schedule meets its wall-clock budget on every tick
of the trial without a fall. This is descriptive single-trial
evidence of behaviour under timing pressure, not a statistical
comparison.
VI. FIRST HARDWARE DEPLOYMENT
A first-deploy session was conducted on the Unitree Go2
with the on-robot NVIDIA Orin NX 16 GB module (P-O);
the workstation used for the simulation campaign is denoted
P-W. The cross-compiled controller binary follows the same
code path as the simulation controller, with the hardware
build enabling Unitree DDS communication and the on-robot
proprioceptive estimator. The cache file is seeded from the
simulation-trained Cache-Full cache obtained at the end of the
WBC trot campaign. The session is an informal free-walk: the
operator drives the robot through approximately 90 s of trot
per configuration via the gamepad and applies 20–30 lateral
pushes by hand. Push events are detected from |vy|>0.3 m/s
during trot.
The scope of this session is limited: timing characteri-
sation, qualitative push response, and confirmation that the
simulation-trained cache transfers. The pushes are operator-
applied and not controlled for force, direction, or timing across
configurations, so the section reports qualitative free-walk
evidence rather than a controlled comparative safety result.
Table VI reports the headline numbers; Fig. 4 plots the per-
tick update-time CDF.
TABLE VI
HARDWARE RESULTS ON THE ORIN NX. THE HIT-RATE ROW REPORTS
THE RAW LSH-NEIGHBOUR RATE FOR CACHE-NOCERT AND THE
CERTIFIED-ACCEPTANCE RATE FOR CACHE-FULL. TIMING ENTRIES ARE
IN µS; PUSH EVENTS USE |vy|>0.3 M/S DURING TROT.
Metric
Convex
Cache-NoCert
Cache-Full
Hit rate
—
55.8%
16.0%
Mean
1966
1324
2910
p50
1883
101
3342
p95
2478
3753
4267
p99
3856
5139
5741
Push events
21
32
20
Peak |vy| (m/s)
0.84
0.83
0.68
Min pz (m)
0.301
0.296
0.282
Falls
0
0
0
The un-gated cache reaches the predicted on-robot p50 tim-
ing and shows no fall across the push events. The simulation-
trained cache transfers: certified acceptance is non-zero on
the first trot phase. Cache-Full is the inverted case relative
to simulation, slower than Convex on the Orin NX, and its
mechanism is summarised in Table VII.
The hardware inversion is consistent with the certificate of
Proposition 1 acting as designed: Γ inflates above β( ¯U) for
the majority of LSH-neighbour candidates under the on-robot
QP data, so most candidates are rejected and fall through to the
full QP solve. Certificate-rejected ticks pay both the certificate
evaluation and the QP solve, putting Cache-Full systematically
above Convex.


10−1
100
101
per-tick MPC update time (ms, log scale)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
CDF (TROT ticks)
18.7× p50
Convex (no cache)
Cache-NoCert
Cache-Full
Fig. 4. Per-tick MPC update-time CDF on the Orin NX, trot ticks only. The
18.7× p50 Cache-NoCert speedup over Convex is visible at the 0.5 line;
Cache-Full is bimodal with a certified-acceptance plateau near 0.5 ms and a
climb at ∼3.5 ms from certificate-rejected ticks.
TABLE VII
CACHE-FULL ON THE ORIN NX: THE CERTIFICATE’S HIGH REJECTION
RATE EXPLAINS THE INVERSION OF THE SIMULATION-MEASURED
SPEEDUP. THE RAW LSH-NEIGHBOUR RATE IS TAKEN FROM THE
MATCHED CACHE-NOCERT RUN AS A CROSS-RUN PROXY; THE DERIVED
REJECTION RATE ASSUMES EQUAL RAW-LSH RATES ACROSS RUNS.
Quantity
Value
Raw LSH-neighbour rate (proxy, Cache-NoCert)
55.8%
Certified-acceptance rate (Cache-Full)
16.0%
Derived certificate rejection rate
≈71%
Cache-Full p50 vs Convex p50 (sim)
3.4× faster
Cache-Full p50 vs Convex p50 (hardware)
1.8× slower
VII. THREATS TO VALIDITY
a) Single platform and dynamics setting.: The simulation
campaign uses friction µ = 0.3, the default MuJoCo contact
solver, and flat or scripted-terrain ground. Within these con-
ditions it covers two architectures (WBC, MRT), four cache
configurations, a push ladder from 10 to 100 N, and two
terrain types. Generalisation across payload, contact-model
variation, friction coefficient, and quadruped platform is not
characterised. The hardware session covers a single platform
(Unitree Go2 + Orin NX) under operator-driven free-walk on
flat ground.
b) Loose certificate bound.: The certificate is evaluated
in production with λ = 0, the unconstrained relaxation; this
gives the loosest valid weak-duality bound on ∆J. A cached-
dual variant of the bound, which would be tight whenever the
query shares the entry’s active set, is not used in the present
evaluation.
c) Single push direction.: The push tests use a single
lateral direction, both at the simulation failure boundary and
on hardware. A (±x, ±y) sweep at n=50 would characterise
the geometry of the boundary more fully.
d) Sample-size-bounded negative result.: The n = 50
Fisher p-values reported in Table IV are uncorrected and do
not establish equivalence: “no significant difference detected”
is a statement about test power, not about the magnitude of
the underlying effect. The certificate may carry measurable
closed-loop value in regimes that the present evaluation cannot
resolve.
e) Unit of analysis.: The timing distributions in Table II
are aggregated within trial and summarised across trials; per-
tick hypothesis testing is avoided because per-tick samples
within a trial are autocorrelated. The per-trial p50 ratios are
descriptive across n = 15 independent cold-controller spawns
per cell.
f) Baseline coverage.: The cache variants are compared
only against the no-cache Convex baseline of the same MPC
implementation. Warm-started convex MPC, kd-tree nearest-
neighbour retrieval [27], fixed offline dictionaries, and learned
approximate-MPC policies [5], [23] are not included in the
present comparison.
g) Reproducibility protocol.: Every cold-controller trial
records the binary SHA-256, the YAML configuration that
ran, the per-trial cache file, the per-tick controller log, and
the scenario time-series log. Per-cell trial logs are gated
by an anomaly scanner with pre-specified rejection criteria
(controller anomalies, NaN/Inf streams, RMSE values above
physically reasonable caps); all n = 50 re-power cells and
all reported exploratory cells pass these checks. The same
controller binary path is used in simulation and on hardware;
only the communication and estimator backends differ. Aggre-
gate per-cell tabulations, per-knob sweep tables, and the full
hardware-session breakdown are available from the authors on
reasonable request.
VIII. CONCLUSION
This paper presented Certified CacheMPC, a memory-
augmented MPC framework in which an LSH-indexed cache
returns previously computed contact-force trajectories and an
a-posteriori per-query certificate produces a Lagrangian dual-
gap quantity Γ( ¯U) that upper-bounds the true suboptimality
∆J of any feasible accepted retrieval. The certificate is de-
terministic and source-independent. A bounded-budget con-
troller schedule combines top-K certified retrieval, a deadline-
bounded QP solve, and a shifted last-certified fallback.
The framework was evaluated through a cold-controller
simulation campaign and a first-deploy session on the on-robot
NVIDIA Orin NX; the headline numbers are in Tables II–
VII. The un-gated cache produces a large median solve-
time speedup in simulation that transfers to hardware. No
statistically significant difference between the cache variants
and the no-cache baseline is detected at n = 50 at any tested
failure-boundary cell. The certificate functions as a verifiable
upper bound on the cost gap of any applied control, rather
than as a runtime safety mechanism whose effect the present
evaluation can resolve.
IX. FUTURE WORK
The directions opened by this work are grouped into four
families. Tighter certified bounds. Reuse of cached multi-
pliers (λℓ, λu) would tighten Γ towards ∆J whenever the


query shares the entry’s active set, given a guarded staleness
check; a Hoffman-bound perturbation analysis would extend
Proposition 1 to ρfeas > 0. Formal closed-loop theory. A
practical-orbital stability theorem on top of the per-query
budget β( ¯U) and a worst-case real-time theorem on top of
the bounded-budget schedule of Section IV-D are natural next
steps, requiring a phase-conditioned value function, recursive
feasibility under contact-mode switches, and a preemption-safe
inner solver. Empirical breadth. A constant-velocity hardware
tracking matrix, a powered non-inferiority hardware safety
matrix, (±x, ±y) push sweeps at n = 50, and richer terrain
(steps, slopes, granular ground) are natural next campaigns.
Baselines and cache lifecycle. Warm-started convex MPC, kd-
tree neighbour search, fixed offline dictionaries, and learned
approximate-MPC policies provide stronger reference points;
on-robot fine-tuning and online refinement of the cache are
expected to reduce the certificate rejection rate observed on
hardware.
REFERENCES
[1] J. Di Carlo, P. M. Wensing, B. Katz, G. Bledt, and S. Kim, “Dynamic
locomotion in the MIT Cheetah 3 through convex model-predictive
control,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS), 2018,
pp. 1–9.
[2] B. Katz, J. Di Carlo, and S. Kim, “Mini Cheetah: A platform for pushing
the limits of dynamic quadruped control,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robot. Autom. (ICRA), 2019, pp. 6295–6301.
[3] J.-P. Sleiman, F. Farshidian, M. V. Minniti, and M. Hutter, “A unified
MPC framework for whole-body dynamic locomotion and manipula-
tion,” IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett., vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 4688–4695, 2021.
[4] K. N. Nguyen et al., “TinyMPC: Model-predictive control on resource-
constrained microcontrollers,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom.
(ICRA), 2024.
[5] B. Carius, R. Ranftl, V. Koltun, and M. Hutter, “MPC-Net: A first
principles guided policy search,” IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett., vol. 5, no.
2, pp. 2897–2904, 2020.
[6] A. Bemporad, M. Morari, V. Dua, and E. N. Pistikopoulos, “The explicit
linear quadratic regulator for constrained systems,” Automatica, vol. 38,
no. 1, pp. 3–20, 2002.
[7] P. Indyk and R. Motwani, “Approximate nearest neighbors: Towards
removing the curse of dimensionality,” in Proc. 30th Annu. ACM Symp.
Theory Comput. (STOC), 1998, pp. 604–613.
[8] H. J. Ferreau, C. Kirches, A. Potschka, H. G. Bock, and M. Diehl,
“qpOASES: A parametric active-set algorithm for quadratic program-
ming,” Math. Program. Comput., vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 327–363, 2014.
[9] G. Frison and M. Diehl, “HPIPM: A high-performance quadratic pro-
gramming framework for model predictive control,” in Proc. IFAC World
Congr., 2020.
[10] C. D. Bellicoso, C. Gehring, J. Hwangbo, P. Fankhauser, and M. Hutter,
“Perception-less terrain adaptation through whole body control and
hierarchical optimization,” in Proc. IEEE-RAS Int. Conf. Humanoid
Robots, 2016, pp. 558–564.
[11] A. Herdt, H. Diedam, P.-B. Wieber, D. Dimitrov, K. Mombaur, and
M. Diehl, “Online walking motion generation with automatic footstep
placement,” Adv. Robot., vol. 24, no. 5–6, pp. 719–737, 2010.
[12] D. A. Bristow, M. Tharayil, and A. G. Alleyne, “A survey of iterative
learning control,” IEEE Control Syst. Mag., vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 96–114,
2006.
[13] E. Todorov, T. Erez, and Y. Tassa, “MuJoCo: A physics engine for
model-based control,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst.
(IROS), 2012, pp. 5026–5033.
[14] P. O. M. Scokaert, D. Q. Mayne, and J. B. Rawlings, “Suboptimal model
predictive control (feasibility implies stability),” IEEE Trans. Autom.
Control, vol. 44, no. 3, pp. 648–654, 1999.
[15] G. Pannocchia, J. B. Rawlings, and S. J. Wright, “Conditions under
which suboptimal nonlinear MPC is inherently robust,” Syst. Control
Lett., vol. 60, no. 9, pp. 747–755, 2011.
[16] G. Bledt, M. J. Powell, B. Katz, J. Di Carlo, P. M. Wensing, and S. Kim,
“MIT Cheetah 3: Design and control of a robust, dynamic quadruped
robot,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS), 2018,
pp. 2245–2252.
[17] M. Hutter, C. Gehring, D. Jud, A. Lauber, C. D. Bellicoso, V. Tsounis,
J. Hwangbo, K. Bodie, P. Fankhauser, M. Bloesch, R. Diethelm, S.
Bachmann, A. Melzer, and M. Hoepflinger, “ANYmal — a highly
mobile and dynamic quadrupedal robot,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf.
Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS), 2016, pp. 38–44.
[18] J. Hwangbo, J. Lee, A. Dosovitskiy, D. Bellicoso, V. Tsounis, V. Koltun,
and M. Hutter, “Learning agile and dynamic motor skills for legged
robots,” Sci. Robot., vol. 4, no. 26, p. eaau5872, 2019.
[19] G. B. Margolis and P. Agrawal, “Walk these ways: Tuning robot control
for generalization with multiplicity of behavior,” in Proc. Conf. Robot
Learn. (CoRL), 2022, pp. 22–31.
[20] M. Diehl, H. G. Bock, J. P. Schl¨oder, R. Findeisen, Z. Nagy, and
F. Allg¨ower, “Real-time optimization and nonlinear model predictive
control of processes governed by differential-algebraic equations,” J.
Process Control, vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 577–585, 2002.
[21] R. Verschueren, G. Frison, D. Kouzoupis, J. Frey, N. van Duijkeren, A.
Zanelli, B. Novoselnik, T. Albin, R. Quirynen, and M. Diehl, “acados—
a modular open-source framework for fast embedded optimal control,”
Math. Program. Comput., vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 147–183, 2022.
[22] P. Tøndel, T. A. Johansen, and A. Bemporad, “An algorithm for
multi-parametric quadratic programming and explicit MPC solutions,”
Automatica, vol. 39, no. 3, pp. 489–497, 2003.
[23] M. Hertneck, J. K¨ohler, S. Trimpe, and F. Allg¨ower, “Learning an
approximate model predictive controller with guarantees,” IEEE Control
Syst. Lett., vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 543–548, 2018.
[24] J. A. Paulson and A. Mesbah, “Approximate closed-loop robust model
predictive control with guaranteed stability and constraint satisfaction,”
IEEE Control Syst. Lett., vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 719–724, 2020.
[25] M. Datar, N. Immorlica, P. Indyk, and V. S. Mirrokni, “Locality-sensitive
hashing scheme based on p-stable distributions,” in Proc. 20th Annu.
Symp. Comput. Geom. (SoCG), 2004, pp. 253–262.
[26] A. Andoni and P. Indyk, “Near-optimal hashing algorithms for approxi-
mate nearest neighbor in high dimensions,” Commun. ACM, vol. 51, no.
1, pp. 117–122, 2008.
[27] J. L. Bentley, “Multidimensional binary search trees used for associative
searching,” Commun. ACM, vol. 18, no. 9, pp. 509–517, 1975.
[28] L. Sentis and O. Khatib, “Synthesis of whole-body behaviors through
hierarchical control of behavioral primitives,” Int. J. Humanoid Robot.,
vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 505–518, 2005.
[29] D. Kim, J. Di Carlo, B. Katz, G. Bledt, and S. Kim, “Highly dynamic
quadruped locomotion via whole-body impulse control and model
predictive control,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.06586, 2019.
[30] R. Grandia, F. Farshidian, R. Ranftl, and M. Hutter, “Feedback MPC
for torque-controlled legged robots,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell.
Robots Syst. (IROS), 2019, pp. 4730–4737.
[31] G. Williams, A. Aldrich, and E. A. Theodorou, “Model predictive path
integral control: From theory to parallel computation,” J. Guid. Control
Dyn., vol. 40, no. 2, pp. 344–357, 2017.
[32] D. Lim´on, T. Alamo, F. Salas, and E. F. Camacho, “Input to state stability
of min-max MPC controllers for nonlinear systems with bounded
uncertainties,” Automatica, vol. 42, no. 5, pp. 797–803, 2006.
[33] D. Q. Mayne, J. B. Rawlings, C. V. Rao, and P. O. M. Scokaert, “Con-
strained model predictive control: Stability and optimality,” Automatica,
vol. 36, no. 6, pp. 789–814, 2000.
