RGB: RL Guided Whole-Body MPPI for Humanoid Control
Yunsoo Seo, Sol Choi, Euncheol Im, Myo Taeg Lim, Yisoo Lee
Abstract— Humanoid robots require whole-body controllers
that are both robust and precise in contact-rich environments.
While deep reinforcement learning (RL) achieves robust stabil-
ity, its behavior is tightly coupled to the training objective and
command interface, making it difficult to add new feedback
objectives without retraining. In this study, we propose an
RL guided whole-body model predictive path integral (MPPI)
framework that acts as an add-on feedback controller on top
of a pretrained RL policy. Instead of using RL policy as the
final controller, we use it as a sampling prior that biases
MPPI rollouts toward dynamically feasible behaviors. Task
objectives are specified through modular MPPI cost terms, and
MPPI closes the loop by continuously correcting the RL prior
online to satisfy these objectives without retraining the policy.
Simulations on a 29-DoF Unitree G1 humanoid in MuJoCo
demonstrate stable high-rate control (average 280 Hz). The
proposed method improves task-level precision over a pure RL
baseline under the same command interface. This is achieved by
correcting systematic drift during straight walking and tracking
additional whole-body reference signals imposed through the
cost.
I. INTRODUCTION
Humanoid robots are expected to perform sophisticated,
complex, and human-like motions while maintaining dy-
namic balance and ensuring safety in uncertain, contact-rich
environments. To achieve these capabilities, prior research
has primarily followed two major paradigms: model-based
control [1] and learning-based approaches centered on rein-
forcement learning (RL) [2]. Model-based methods provide
interpretability and stability guarantees grounded in system
dynamics, whereas learning-based approaches offer adapt-
ability and the ability to handle high-dimensional behaviors.
Nevertheless, both paradigms exhibit inherent limitations,
making it difficult to develop a unified whole-body control
framework that simultaneously achieves high precision, ro-
bustness, and strong generalization across diverse tasks and
environments.
In particular, deep RL has demonstrated impressive whole-
body locomotion skills with strong stability and adaptabil-
ity [3]–[5]. By enabling humanoid robots to experience
diverse and challenging scenarios in simulation, RL fa-
cilitates the acquisition of robust behaviors. However, en-
*This work was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea
(NRF) grant funded by the Korea government(MSIT) (RS-2024-00339632,
RS-2025-25448259).
Y. Seo, S. Choi, and Y. Lee are with the Center for Humanoid Research,
Korea Institute of Science and Technology (KIST), 02792 Seoul, South
Korea. Y. Seo is now with University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas
78712, USA. S. Choi is also with the Department of Mechanical Engineer-
ing, Yonsei University, 03722, Seoul, South Korea
M. T. Lim is with the School of Electrical Engineering, Korea University,
02841 Seoul, South Korea
Corresponding author: Yisoo Lee yisoo.lee@kist.re.kr
hancing robustness through extensive domain randomization
and disturbance training often introduces a trade-off, where
motion precision and fine-grained control performance may
be compromised.
Furthermore, while RL has achieved remarkable perfor-
mance in specific tasks, deploying it as a general-purpose
whole-body controller remains challenging. Learned poli-
cies are inherently shaped by their training objectives and
command interfaces. For instance, incorporating additional
objectives such as explicit swing foot clearnace modulation
or pelvis height regulation to a locomotion policy trained for
planar velocity tracking typically accept limited command
inputs (e.g., base linear velocity and yaw rate) [6], requires
task specific reward redesign and retraining. This results in
significant development time and limited scalability across
tasks.
Recent efforts have leveraged human motion data to
learn generalized whole-body motion tracking policies via
RL [7], [8]. While these approaches broaden the behavioral
repertoire, achieving both rapid, highly dynamic motion
generation and fine-grained precision in control remains
an unresolved challenge. Moreover, RL-based policies do
not naturally enforce strict constraint satisfaction, such as
torque limits, which is critical for reliable and safe humanoid
operation.
Model-based methods, particularly recent whole-body
model predictive control (MPC), offer a structured approach
by optimizing composite task objectives online while ex-
plicitly enforcing system constraints [9], [10]. Sampling-
based MPC methods, such as Model Predictive Path In-
tegral (MPPI) [11], are especially appealing for contact-
rich humanoid locomotion, as they can optimize non-smooth
objectives through parallel rollouts without requiring analytic
derivatives [12]–[15]. More recently, physics engine-based
predictive control frameworks, including MuJoCo MPC
(MJPC) [16], [17], have further improved the practicality
of whole-body predictive control by leveraging high-fidelity
forward dynamics and efficient rollout computation [18].
Despite these advantages, applying sampling-based MPC
to high-DoF humanoids remains challenging. In particular,
vanilla MPPI is highly sensitive to initialization and sampling
distributions. Achieving feasible rollouts and stable perfor-
mance often requires substantial manual tuning and carefully
designed proposal distributions, and performance can still
degrade under rapidly changing contact conditions.
These complementary strengths and limitations motivate
a hybrid approach that preserves the robustness of learned
locomotion while enabling explicit objective shaping and
feedback refinement through predictive control. In this study,
arXiv:2606.25123v1  [cs.RO]  23 Jun 2026


we propose an RL guided whole-body predictive control
framework that uses a pretrained RL policy as a sampling
prior within a physics engine-based MPPI. Crucially, our
method can be viewed as an add-on, plug-and-play controller,
which the base RL policy remains unchanged and continues
to provide robust locomotion, while MPPI adds generalized
whole-body feedback objectives through modular cost terms.
The main contributions of this work are as follows:
1) We propose an RL guided whole-body MPPI frame-
work that acts as an add-on feedback controller for a
pretrained RL policy.
2) We establish a modular objective formulation that en-
ables flexible task-level command augmentation with-
out modifying or retraining the learned policy.
3) We implement an asynchronous, physics-engine-based
MPPI on a 29-DoF humanoid and achieve real-time
operation with an average effective update rate of
∼280 Hz in simulation.
4) We demonstrate improved task-level precision over
a pure RL baseline under identical command inputs,
while preserving robust locomotion from the RL prior.
II. BACKGROUND
A. Model predictive path integral (MPPI)
MPPI [12], [19] is a sampling-based stochastic optimal
control method that optimizes a control sequence by evaluat-
ing a population of perturbed rollouts over a finite prediction
horizon. At each control step, the method samples control
perturbations, simulates the corresponding trajectories, and
aggregates them through an importance-weighted update.
In this work, MPPI serves as the model-based predictive
controller, which is integrated with a learned policy as a
sampling prior.
We briefly review the standard formulation of MPPI.
Consider a discrete-time dynamical system
xt+1 = f(xt, ut + δut),
δut ∼N(0, νI),
(1)
where xt denotes the system state at time t, f(·) is the
discrete-time system dynamics. The control input is decom-
posed into a nominal signal ut and an gaussian exploration
noise term δu ∼N(0, νI) that drives the sampling process
with covariance νI. The stochastic exploration around u is
what later allows us to bias the sampling distribution using
RL.
The control objective is expressed as the minimization of
a finite-horizon cost functional
S(x) = ϕ(xT ) +
T −1
X
t=0
l(xt, ut),
(2)
where x = [xt, . . . , xT ] is the state trajectory, ϕ(xT ) is a
terminal cost, and l(xt, ut) is a running cost that encodes
the task objective and soft constraints.
In the path-integral derivation of MPPI, a likelihood-
ratio term appears when relating the controlled dynamics to
an uncontrolled reference process. This change of measure
naturally introduces a quadratic penalty on the control and
leads to an augmented instantaneous cost of the form
˜l(x, u, δu) = l(x, u) + (1 −ν−1)
2
δuTR δu
+ uTR δu + 1
2uTR u,
(3)
where R is a positive-definite weighting matrix. The addi-
tional terms arise from the injected noise δu and recover the
usual quadratic effort penalty 1
2uTRu known from classical
optimal control.
Given this modified running cost, each sampled trajectory
n ∈{1, . . . , N} accumulates a cost-to-go ˜Sn(x). MPPI then
updates the control sequence by computing an importance-
weighted average of the sampled perturbations:
ut ←ut +
PN
n=1 exp

−1
λ
  ˜Sn(x) −˜Smin

δut,n
PN
n=1 exp

−1
λ
  ˜Sn(x) −˜Smin

,
(4)
where δut,n is the perturbation applied at time index t for the
n-th rollout, ˜Smin is the minimum cost among all sampled
trajectories, and λ is the inverse temperature parameter
controlling how sharply the weighting focuses on low-cost
trajectories. Intuitively, rollouts with smaller cumulative cost
receive exponentially larger weights, so the updated control
is biased toward perturbations that produced more desirable
outcomes.
This sampling-based update has several properties that are
particularly relevant for high-dimensional humanoid control.
First, the update relies solely on rollout evaluations and does
not require derivatives of the dynamics or cost, allowing
the incorporation of complex nonlinear models or physics
engines. Second, rollouts are independent and can be eval-
uated in parallel, enabling efficient computation for real-
time predictive control. These properties motivate the hybrid
framework introduced in the next section, which leverages
derivative-free rollouts and parallel computation for whole-
body control.
B. Limitations of Vanilla MPPI for Humanoids
Despite its simplicity and derivative-free nature, vanilla
MPPI can be brittle for high-dimensional humanoid loco-
motion. First, MPPI performance depends strongly on the
sampling distribution, including the choice of covariance
and the mean, which is often set by warm-starting from
the previously optimized sequence. Poorly chosen sampling
statistics can lead to inefficient exploration, large variance
in rollout costs, and convergence to suboptimal local solu-
tions [20], [21]. Second, in contact-rich tasks, dynamically
feasible trajectories may occupy only a narrow subset of the
state–action space. As a result, many sampled rollouts may
violate implicit feasibility (e.g., unstable contact sequences),
wasting samples and degrading real-time performance. This
sensitivity is characteristic of nonconvex trajectory optimiza-
tion in high-dimensional systems [22]. Finally, although
physics engine-based rollouts enable derivative-free opti-
mization, a large number of samples may still be required


Fig. 1.
Overview of the proposed RL guided whole-body MPPI framework. A pretrained RL policy provides a nominal motion prior for sampling, and
knot based MPPI refines it using physics rollouts and modular cost terms as an add-on feedback controller. The refined command is applied immediately
upon completion of planning in an asynchronous receding-horizon loop, and a low-level PD controller tracks the joint targets.
to reliably improve the control sequence under tight real-
time constraints, particularly when discontinuous contact
transitions are present.
III. PROPOSED METHOD
To address the sensitivity of vanilla MPPI to sampling
statistics and initialization in high-dimensional humanoid
control, we propose a RL guided whole-body MPPI frame-
work that integrates a learned motion prior with physics
engine-based predictive optimization.
A. Overview of the RL Guided MPPI framework
Fig. 1 shows overall structure of the proposed hybrid
control framework. The framework combines (a) a pretrained
RL policy that provides a motion prior and (b) a knot-
parameterized MPPI that refines the prior using physics-
consistent rollouts.
The overall control stack operates at three different rates.
First, the RL policy runs at 50 Hz and outputs a nominal joint
position reference qRL. Second, the MPPI refines this prior
in an asynchronous receding-horizon loop. Once planning
finishes, it outputs an updated desired joint command using
qRL as the mean of the sampling distribution, yielding an
average effective update rate of ∼280 Hz in simulation with
CPU-based parallel rollouts. Finally, a low-level joint PD
controller runs at 500 Hz, tracking the MPPI-refined desired
states (qdes
t
) and computing the corresponding desired joint
torques Γdes. These update rates are implementation choices
rather than fixed design constraints, and both the RL policy
and MPPI modules can operate at higher frequencies depend-
ing on computational resources. Further details can be found
in the following subsections and Algorithm 1.
B. RL Policy-Based Sample Trajectory Generation
1) RL policy: An RL policy provides a nominal whole-
body joint position that serves as a structured sampling prior
for MPPI. We employ a pretrained humanoid policy, a com-
mand velocity tracking locomotion policy, as the prior for
the proposed RL guided MPPI. The framework is agnostic
to the specific RL algorithm, training procedure, or reward
design. Any learned policy that outputs a nominal whole-
body command with a compatible action interface can be
used. Importantly, the RL policy is trained as a standalone
controller, without considering the presence of MPPI, and is
assumed to be sufficiently generalized for direct deployment
in real robot control. Note that the proposed method does
not require training or modification of the policy to integrate
it into the predictive control framework.
2) RL policy as a sampling prior: At each control step,
the controller observes the current RL observation ot and the
RL policy πRL(·) outputs a nominal joint position reference
qRL. This reference is utilized as the mean of the sample
generator in MPPI, around which Gaussian perturbations are
applied.
Note that the command inputs used by the RL policy are
shared with MPPI. The same command vector contained
in the RL observation ot is used to generate the nominal
prior ¯z = πRL(ot) and is also used consistently during
MPPI rollouts so that refinement is performed around the
intended commanded behavior of the prior. Additional task
objectives are introduced only through MPPI cost terms
as task-space references, enabling closed-loop refinement
without modifying the RL command interface.
3) Knot-based interpolation: Directly optimizing a full
control sequence over the horizon leads to a high dimensional
search space. Thus, we employ knot-based sampling ap-
proach [23] which parameterize the MPPI control sequence
using H knots. Knot-based interpolation enables the eval-
uation of continuous and extended trajectories using only a
small number of sampled control sequences, thereby improv-
ing computational efficiency and exploration effectiveness.


Specifically, we treat the knot vector z = [z⊤
1 , . . . , z⊤
H]⊤∈
RH×J as the optimization variable, where J is the number
of actuated joint DoFs and each zt ∈RJ corresponds to a
joint-position target at a knot time. At each MPPI update,
we sample H knot sequences around the RL mean. Then,
we can compose the following equation.
z(n) = πRL(ot) + ϵ(n),
ϵ(n) ∼N(0, νI),
(5)
where policy input ot denotes the observation used during
RL training, ϵ represents the sampled joint position tar-
get increments at knot nodes, and ν controls the explo-
ration variance around the policy prior. The above equa-
tion reconstructs a high-resolution control sequence from
the knot representation using cubic interpolation, U (k) =
InterpolateKnots(z(k)). This reduces the effective sampling
dimension from T×N×J to H×N×J and yields temporally
smooth commands, since the full rate time sequence control
input is reconstructed by interpolating between knots. The
resulting control sequence is then evaluated through rollouts
to compute the corresponding trajectory and cost.
C. Physics Engine-based Optimal Solution
1) Physics Engine-based Rollout: MPPI injects Gaussian
perturbations according to (5) around the nominal sequence
and samples N candidate trajectories in a low-dimensional
knot space with H knots. Each candidate is evaluated through
forward simulation in the physics engine, and an importance-
weighted update is computed based on the resulting task
costs. Generated perturbed control propagate rollouts through
the forward dynamics
x(n)
h+1 = f

x(n)
h , u(n)
h

,
h = 0, . . . , H −1.
(6)
In our framework, the physics engine acts as a rollout
oracle. Given the current state and a candidate control
sequence, it performs forward simulation—including contact
dynamics—and returns the resulting trajectory and cost.
This process does not require analytic Jacobians, explicit
dynamics derivations, or backward sensitivity propagation.
The derivative-free nature of this approach is particularly
advantageous for contact-rich humanoid locomotion, where
intermittent contacts and non-smooth transitions make local
linearization and gradient-based methods unreliable.
MPPI naturally supports parallel computation, as each
rollout is independent. Accordingly, physics engine-based
predictive control frameworks including MJPC evaluate large
batches of candidates trajectories in parallel. By combin-
ing learning-guided sampling with physics engine-supported
parallel rollouts, the proposed framework enables fast and
scalable predictive optimization for contact-rich humanoid
control.
2) Cost-based Optimal Solution Computation: For each
rollout n, we compute the finite-horizon trajectory cost S(n)
with equations (2) and (6).
S(n) = ϕ

x(n)
H

+
H−1
X
h=0
ℓ

x(n)
h , u(n)
h

,
(7)
Algorithm 1 RL-Guided Knot-Based MPPI Overview
1: Initialize nominal knots
¯z ←0
2: while the system is running do
3:
Read state xt
4:
if the RL policy is updated at 50 Hz then
5:
¯z ←πRL(ot)
▷Sec. III-B.2
6:
end if
7:
if the planner computation is complete then
8:
for j = 1 to J do
9:
for n = 1 to N do
10:
Sample knot noise
ϵ(n) ∼N(0, νI)
11:
z(n) ←¯z + ϵ(n)
▷Sec. ??
12:
U (n) ←InterpolateKnots(z(n))
13:
(X(n), S(n))
←
RolloutAndCost(xt, U (n))
14:
end for
15:
{w(n)}N
n=1
←
ImportanceWeights
 {S(n)}N
n=1, λ

▷Eq. 7
16:
¯z ←¯z + PN
n=1 w(n)ϵ(n)
17:
end for
18:
qdes
t
←FirstControl (InterpolateKnots(¯z))
19:
end if
20:
if the PD controller is updated at 500 Hz then
21:
Apply PD control to track qdes
t
▷Sec. ??
22:
end if
23: end while
The terminal and running costs ϕ and ℓtogether constitute
a multi-objective cost function, allowing task objectives
and constraints to be composed and weighted according to
the control requirements. Then the normalized importance
weights are described as follows:
w(n) =
PN
n=1 exp

−1
λ
  ˜Sn(x) −˜Smin

ϵ(n)
PN
n=1 exp

−1
λ
  ˜Sn(x) −˜Smin

,
(8)
Using the importance weights w(n), we compute the refined
knot vector z⋆= ¯z+PN
n=1 w(n)ϵ(n). We then interpolate z⋆
to a dense desired joint-position sequence and set qdes
t
to its
first element. Only qdes
t
is executed, and the optimization is
repeated at the next time step during the receding-horizon.
3) Control Input: Finally, the desired joint torques are
computed using a joint-space PD controller and applied to
the robot actuators:
Γdes = Kp(qdes
t
−q) −Kd ˙q,
(9)
where q and ˙q are the measured joint state vectors. The PD
gain matrices Kp and Kd are constant diagonal matrices and
are identical to those used during policy training.
“‘latex “‘
D. Design Rationale
1) Decoupling Learning from Task Specification: The RL
policy is trained with a reward function that may not be fully


aligned with the objectives required at deployment time. Our
framework explicitly decouples policy learning from task
specification. The RL policy is used solely to shape the
sampling distribution and does not act as the control law
itself. Task objectives and constraints are instead imposed
through modular MPPI cost terms.
As a result, new tasks can be introduced by modifying
the MPPI cost function without retraining or fine-tuning the
RL policy. This separation enables flexible task composition
while preserving the structured motion prior provided by the
learned policy.
2) RL Guided Sampling and Sample Efficiency: Center-
ing the MPPI sampling distribution on the learned policy
πRL biases rollouts toward dynamically feasible whole-body
behaviors. This significantly improves sample efficiency in
high-dimensional humanoid control, where naive exploration
can result in a large number of infeasible or unstable trajec-
tories.
By leveraging a policy that has already learned stabi-
lizing locomotion or motion patterns, MPPI exploration
is concentrated in a structured region of the state–action
space, reducing sensitivity to initialization and improving
convergence.
3) Implicit Contact Handling via Physics Rollouts:
Contact-rich feasibility is enforced implicitly through physics
engine rollouts during MPPI evaluation. In our implementa-
tion, contact handling and constraint-consistent state propa-
gation are provided by the simulator during forward simu-
lation. We do not introduce additional hand-crafted contact
constraint penalties in the cost function.
Instead, infeasible contact behaviors naturally incur higher
rollout costs due to unstable state evolution, allowing MPPI
to reject them through importance weighting.
IV. SIMULATION RESULTS
A. System Setup
We evaluate the proposed RL guided whole body MPPI in
MuJoCo using a 29 DoF Unitree G1 humanoid model. Roll-
out evaluation was performed using MJPC, leveraging CPU-
based parallel computation. All validations were conducted
on a workstation equipped with an Intel Core i9-14900KF
CPU, 32 GB RAM, and an NVIDIA GeForce RTX 4070 Ti
GPU.
For the evaluation of the proposed method, a humanoid
walking policy that can track command velocity is trained
and utilized. While our framework is agnostic to the specific
RL algorithm and policy architecture, we employ a policy
trained independently in IsaacLab using proximal policy
optimization (PPO) [24]. The policy was trained as a stan-
dalone controller for direct deployment, without considering
integration with the proposed MPPI framework. The reward
consisted of command-tracking terms (linear and yaw ve-
locity), regularization terms encouraging smooth actions and
joint motions, stability/uprightness and joint-limit penalties,
and gait-related terms (e.g., foot air-time and symmetry
gait phase). The policy outputs desired joint positions for
the 12 lower-body DoFs. Observation includes base angular
velocity, projected gravity vector, velocity command, joint
positions, joint velocities, previous action, and gait phase.
For the knot-based MPPI, we use N = 128 rollouts with
a horizon of 0.02 s, a control timestep of dt = 0.002 s (500
Hz), H = 2 spline knot points, and Gaussian exploration
noise with standard deviation σ = 0.2. In all experiments,
task objectives are specified by augmenting the MPPI stage
cost in equation (7) with task-specific terms, while keeping
the pretrained RL policy unchanged.
B. Results
Training a robust whole-body RL policy typically requires
substantial reward tuning, and the resulting command inter-
face is often limited. Consequently, incorporating additional
objectives outside the original interface usually requires
reward redesign and retraining.
To address this limitation, we evaluate task augmentation
with the proposed method.The pretrained locomotion policy
is kept unchanged and used as a robust motion prior, while
MPPI augments the behavior by adding task objectives
through cost terms and refining the prior in closed loop.
This closed-loop refinement compensates systematic tracking
errors online, improving task-level precision while preserving
the robust locomotion behavior of the learned policy.
As representative tasks, we consider straight-walk drift
suppression and base-height regulation for a squat motion.
The straight-walk task regulates lateral position and heading
to mitigate drift induced by symmetry-breaking bias under
a zero yaw command. The squat task evaluates whether
an explicit whole-body posture objective can be imposed
through cost augmentation alone.
a) Straight-walk drift suppression: We first evaluate
walking velocity tracking under the same command inter-
face used for RL training, commanded x and y velocity
and angular velocity around z-axis. In practice, learning a
symmetry consistent locomotion policy is often challenging
even when trained with symmetric observations and rewards,
the resulting policy can exhibit a persistent left-right bias
due to stochastic optimization, contact discontinuities. As
a consequence, a pure RL baseline may fail to straight
walk under a zero angular velocity command, drifting or
gradually turning despite, the yaw reference is zero (ψdes =
0). To isolate the benefit of the proposed controller, we
use a pretrained RL policy that exhibits this straight-line
tracking deficiency and verify whether MPPI refinement can
suppress the bias without retraining. In this experiment, the
same locomotion command (vdes
x
, vdes
y
, ψdes) = (1, 0, 0) is
provided to both the RL policy and the MPPI rollouts, so
the nominal behavior remains that of the original velocity-
tracking policy. MPPI then augments this behavior by adding
an extra task objective through the cost term ℓ, forming a
task-space feedback loop that reduces drift while preserving
robust locomotion.
Specifically, we add a straight-walk objective that penal-
izes both lateral drift and heading drift:
ℓ= βy ∥ybase −ydes∥2 + βψ ∥ψbase −ψdes∥2,
(10)


-1.0
-0.5
0.0
0.5
Y [m]
Time [s]
0.0
1.5
3.0
4.5
6.0
7.5
9.0
10.5
0.5
1.0
0.0
X Velocity [m/s]
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0.2
0.0
Y Velocity [m/s]
(a) Top view of the simulated humanoid G1 
y
x
RL guided MPPI
RL
t=0 s
t=3 s
t=6 s
t=9 s
t=11.268 s
RL guided MPPI
RL
vxdes
RL guided MPPI
RL
vydes
Time [s]
0.0
1.5
3.0
4.5
6.0
7.5
9.0
10.5
Time [s]
0.0
1.5
3.0
4.5
6.0
7.5
9.0
10.5
(b) Global y-position of the robot base body
(c) x-axis velocity tracking result 
(d) y-axis velocity tracking result 
RL guided MPPI
RL
ydes
Fig. 2.
Straight walking performance comparison between pure RL and
RL guided MPPI.
Where ydes is set to the initial base lateral position and βy, βψ
is a scalar weight used as 25. Here, we only use the running
cost ℓaccumulated over the finite-horizon, and we do not
include an explicit terminal cost, ϕ

x(n)
H

. No additional
cost terms are used beyond those defined in ℓ. When ℓis not
evaluated for planning, the system reverts to the pretrained
RL policy alone.
Fig. 2 summarizes straight-walking performance over a
11.265 s trial. The proposed RL guided MPPI significantly
suppresses drift accumulation, reducing the RMSE of the
base lateral position error from 0.339 m for the pure RL
policy to 0.022 m. This indicates that the added straight-walk
objective introduces a task-space closed-loop refinement that
compensates systematic left–right bias in the pretrained
policy, enabling near-straight locomotion while retaining the
robust walking behavior provided by the RL prior. Fig. 2(c)
further shows that the forward velocity tracking accuracy is
comparable between the two methods, with RMSE values
of 0.773 for RL guided MPPI and 0.806 for pure RL. In
contrast, the lateral velocity tracking in Fig. 2(d) improves
noticeably, where RL guided MPPI achieves an RMSE of
(a)  
t=0.15 s
t=3 s
t=6 s
t=9 s
t=12 s
z
x
0.78 m
0.74 m
0.71 m
0.74 m
0.78 m
(b)  
RL guided MPPI
RL
zdes
Time [s]
0.0
1.5
3.0
4.5
6.0
7.5
9.0
10.5
0.65
0.70
0.75
0.80
Z [m]
Fig. 3.
Squat task performance via base height cost augmentation. (a) Left
view snapshots of the simulated Humanoid G1. (b) Base-height tracking
with a piecewise-linear reference zdes (0.71–0.78 m). The RL baseline
remains near its nominal height since z is not a part of the policy command
interface.
0.021 m/s compared to 0.046 m/s for pure RL. These results
support that incorporating task-space feedback through MPPI
improves motion precision, particularly in drift-related com-
ponents, without degrading the nominal velocity-tracking
performance of the learned policy.
b) Squat task: To demonstrate task augmentation be-
yond the RL command interface, we add a base-height
objective for a squat motion through cost composition.
Specifically, we augment the MPPI stage cost with a base-
height tracking term,
ℓ= βz ∥zbase −zdes(t)∥2,
(11)
where zbase is the robot base height, zdes is a piecewise-linear
height reference, and βz = 100.
Fig. 3(b) shows that RL guided MPPI tracks the prescribed
base-height reference over the entire motion, including the
transition regions between descent and ascent.
Unlike the straight-walk scenario where the command is
expressed in planar task coordinates (vdes
x
, vdes
y
, ψdes), the
squat task introduces an additional vertical objective that the
pretrained RL policy cannot directly command or regulate.
Consistent with this, the RL only curve in Fig. 3(b) remains
near its nominal base height instead of following zdes(t). In
contrast, our proposed method closes a task-space feedback
loop in the z direction and achieves accurate base-height
regulation without retraining.
Representative snapshots are shown in Fig. 3(a). Starting
from the nominal upright posture produced by the pretrained
locomotion policy, RL guided MPPI adjusts the lower-body
joint targets to drive the base height toward the time-varying
reference while maintaining balance. The snapshots illustrate


the descent phase, where the controller increases knee and
hip flexion to lower the pelvis, and the ascent phase, where
it reverses this coordination to recover the original height.
Importantly, these posture changes emerge from cost-based
refinement around the RL prior rather than from any explicit
squat command in the RL interface, demonstrating that the
proposed add-on controller can synthesize a whole-body
posture adaptation to satisfy a vertical task objective.
V. CONCLUSION
We presented an RL guided whole-body MPPI framework
for humanoid control, where a pretrained RL policy is used
as a sampling prior and task objectives are specified through
a modular MPPI cost evaluated by physics engine rollouts.
By refining the policy prior online using knot-parameterized
MPPI, the proposed add-on controller improves task-level
precision in real-time while maintaining the robust loco-
motion provided by the pretrained policy. Furthermore, de-
spite relying on CPU-based parallelism, our asynchronous
implementation achieves an average effective update rate
of 280 Hz in simulation, which GPU-based rollouts could
further increase the update rate. In simulation on a 29-
DoF Unitree G1 model in MuJoCo, the method corrected
a common RL failure mode in straight walking under the
same command interface by reducing lateral drift, and it en-
abled task augmentation without retraining by incorporating
additional objectives such as base-height controlling shaping
via cost composition.
This work highlights the benefits of decoupling learning
from task specification. Viewed as an add-on feedback con-
troller, our MPPI module can be attached to a pretrained RL
policy to retain its robust locomotion prior while injecting
precise, whole-body objective shaping through modular cost
design. This plug-and-play structure allows the same learned
controller to be reused across tasks: new objectives can be
introduced by composing or reweighting cost terms, without
modifying the RL policy or its command interface.
While the proposed framework provides a strong plug-
and-play way to add precise whole-body objectives on top
of robust RL locomotion, its behavior is naturally anchored
to the pretrained policy prior used for sampling. Extending
the framework to support larger behavioral changes will be
an exciting direction, for example by incorporating multi-
ple priors (skill libraries), adaptive proposal distributions,
or switching/blending mechanisms. Future work will also
focus on real-hardware deployment, improving robustness
to modeling and contact-estimation errors, and establishing
reliable synchronization and state-estimation pipelines.
REFERENCES
[1] J. Z. Zhang, T. A. Howell, Z. Yi, C. Pan, G. Shi, G. Qu, T. Erez,
Y. Tassa, and Z. Manchester, “Whole-body model-predictive control of
legged robots with mujoco,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.04613, 2025.
[2] Y. Chen, “Walking problem of bipedal humanoid robot: comparison
between model-based and learning-based method,” in 2023 IEEE
3rd International Conference on Power, Electronics and Computer
Applications (ICPECA), 2023, pp. 1629–1633.
[3] T. Haarnoja et al., “Learning agile soccer skills for a bipedal robot with
deep reinforcement learning,” Science Robotics, vol. 9, p. eadi8022,
2024.
[4] I. Radosavovic, T. Xiao, B. Zhang, T. Darrell, J. Malik, and
K. Sreenath, “Real-world humanoid locomotion with reinforcement
learning,” Science Robotics, vol. 9, p. eadi9579, 2024.
[5] G. Li and R. Gomez, “Realizing full-body control of humanoid
robots,” Nature Machine Intelligence, vol. 6, pp. 990–991, 2024.
[6] G. B. Margolis, G. Yang, K. Paigwar, T. Chen, and P. Agrawal, “Rapid
locomotion via reinforcement learning,” The International Journal of
Robotics Research, vol. 43, no. 4, pp. 572–587, 2024.
[7] Y. Ze et al., “Twist2: Scalable, portable, and holistic humanoid data
collection system,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.02832, 2025.
[8] Z. Luo et al., “Sonic: Supersizing motion tracking for natural hu-
manoid whole-body control,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.07820, 2025.
[9] A. L. Bishop, J. Alvarez-Padilla, S. Schoedel, I. S. Sow, J. Chan-
drachud, S. Sharma, W. Kraus, B. Park, R. J. Griffin, J. M. Dolan et al.,
“The surprising effectiveness of linear models for whole-body model-
predictive control,” in 2025 IEEE-RAS 24th International Conference
on Humanoid Robots (Humanoids).
IEEE, 2025, pp. 1–7.
[10] L. Molnar, J. Cheng, G. Fadini, D. Kang, F. Zargarbashi, and S. Coros,
“Whole-body inverse dynamics mpc for legged loco-manipulation,”
IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 2025.
[11] G. Williams, P. Drews, B. Goldfain, J. M. Rehg, and E. A. Theodorou,
“Aggressive driving with model predictive path integral control,” in
2016 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation
(ICRA), 2016, pp. 1433–1440.
[12] G. Williams, A. Aldrich, and E. A. Theodorou, “Model predictive
path integral control: From theory to parallel computation,” Journal
of Guidance, Control, and Dynamics, vol. 40, no. 2, pp. 344–357,
2017.
[13] J. Alvarez-Padilla, J. Z. Zhang, S. Kwok, J. M. Dolan, and
Z. Manchester, “Real-time whole-body control of legged robots with
model-predictive path integral control,” 2024. [Online]. Available:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.10469
[14] D. Kim, E. Im, Y. Kim, M. Lim, and Y. Lee, “Single-instance sampling
for computationally efficient and accurate real-time task space mppi
control,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics, vol. 41, pp. 6327–6344,
2025.
[15] Y. Seo, D. Kim, J. Bak, Y. Oh, and Y. Lee, “Extremely fast com-
putation of com trajectory generation for walking leveraging mppi
algorithm,” in 2023 IEEE-RAS 22nd International Conference on
Humanoid Robots (Humanoids), 2023, pp. 1–7.
[16] T. Howell, N. Gileadi, S. Tunyasuvunakool, K. Zakka, T. Erez, and
Y. Tassa, “Predictive sampling: Real-time behaviour synthesis with
mujoco,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.00541, 2022.
[17] J. Alvarez-Padilla, J. Z. Zhang, S. Kwok, J. M. Dolan, and Z. Manch-
ester, “Real-time whole-body control of legged robots with model-
predictive path integral control,” in 2025 IEEE International Confer-
ence on Robotics and Automation (ICRA).
IEEE, 2025, pp. 14 721–
14 727.
[18] H. Xue, C. Pan, Z. Yi, G. Qu, and G. Shi, “Full-order sampling-based
mpc for torque-level locomotion control via diffusion-style annealing,”
in 2025 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation
(ICRA).
IEEE, 2025, pp. 4974–4981.
[19] G. Williams, P. Drews, B. Goldfain, J. M. Rehg, and E. A. Theodorou,
“Information-theoretic model predictive control: Theory and applica-
tions to autonomous driving,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics, vol. 34,
no. 6, pp. 1603–1622, 2018.
[20] R. Tedrake, Underactuated Robotics, 2023. [Online]. Available:
https://underactuated.csail.mit.edu
[21] I. S. Mohamed, J. Xu, G. S. Sukhatme, and L. Liu, “Toward efficient
mppi trajectory generation with unscented guidance: U-mppi control
strategy,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics, vol. 41, pp. 1172–1192,
2025.
[22] M. Kelly, “An introduction to trajectory optimization: How to do your
own direct collocation,” SIAM Review, vol. 59, no. 4, pp. 849–904,
2017.
[23] C. Tao, F. Wang, H. Jiang, J. He, Y. Chen, and Q. Bu, “Sampling
strategy design for model predictive path integral control on legged
robot locomotion,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.01409, 2026.
[24] J. Schulman, F. Wolski, P. Dhariwal, A. Radford, and O. Klimov,
“Proximal
policy
optimization
algorithms,”
arXiv
preprint
arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
